1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
Increase Font Size
Home Read Sign
Search …
in
NEUROSCIENCE: CANADIAN 1ST EDITION OPEN TEXTBOOK
CONTENTS
1.1 The Cellular Levels of
Organization
Next Section
Introduction
Fluorescence-stained Cell Undergoing Mitosis
In this image, a fluorescently stained cell is shown undergoing mitosis. The cell
membrane is stained red and the green stains show the mitotic spindles inside the
cell. The chromosomes are shown in blue.
Figure 1. A lung cell from a newt, commonly studied for its similarity to human
lung cells, is stained with fluorescent dyes. The green stain reveals mitotic spin‐
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 1/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
Increase Font Size
dles, red is the cell membrane and part of the cytoplasm, and the structures that
appear light blue are chromosomes. This cell is in anaphase of mitosis. (credit:
“Mortadelo2005”/Wikimedia Commons)
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
Describe the structure and function of the cell membrane, including its regulation of materials
into and out of the cell
Describe the functions of the various cytoplasmic organelles
Explain the structure and contents of the nucleus, as well as the process of DNA replication
Explain the process by which a cell builds proteins using the DNA code
List the stages of the cell cycle in order, including the steps of cell division in somatic cells
Discuss how a cell differentiates and becomes more specialized
List the morphological and physiological characteristics of some representative cell types in the
human body
You developed from a single fertilized egg cell into the complex organism containing trillions of
cells that you see when you look in a mirror. During this developmental process, early, undifferenti‐
ated cells differentiate and become specialized in their structure and function. These different cell
types form specialized tissues that work in concert to perform all of the functions neceNsseaxrty S efcotri otnhe
living organism. Cellular and developmental biologists study how the continued division of a single
cell leads to such complexity and differentiation.
Consider the difference between a structural cell in the skin and a nerve cell. A structural skin cell
may be shaped like a flat plate (squamous) and live only for a short time before it is shed and re‐
placed. Packed tightly into rows and sheets, the squamous skin cells provide a protective barrier for
the cells and tissues that lie beneath. A nerve cell, on the other hand, may be shaped something like
a star, sending out long processes up to a meter in length and may live for the entire lifetime of the
organism. With their long winding appendages, nerve cells can communicate with one another and
with other types of body cells and send rapid signals that inform the organism about its environment
and allow it to interact with that environment. These differences illustrate one very important theme
that is consistent at all organizational levels of biology: the form of a structure is optimally suited to
perform particular functions assigned to that structure. Keep this theme in mind as you tour the in‐
side of a cell and are introduced to the various types of cells in the body.
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 2/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
A primary responsibility of each cell is to contribute to homeostasis. HomeostasiIns cisre aa steer mFo nust eSdi zien
biology that refers to a dynamic state of balance within parameters that are compatible with life. For
example, living cells require a water-based environment to survive in, and there are various physical
(anatomical) and physiological mechanisms that keep all of the trillions of living cells in the human
body moist. This is one aspect of homeostasis. When a particular parameter, such as blood pressure
or blood oxygen content, moves far enough out of homeostasis (generally becoming too high or too
low), illness or disease—and sometimes death—inevitably results.
The concept of a cell started with microscopic observations of dead cork tissue by scientist Robert
Hooke in 1665. Without realizing their function or importance, Hook coined the term “cell” based
on the resemblance of the small subdivisions in the cork to the rooms that monks inhabited, called
cells. About ten years later, Antonie van Leeuwenhoek became the first person to observe living and
moving cells under a microscope. In the century that followed, the theory that cells represented the
basic unit of life would develop. These tiny fluid-filled sacs house components responsible for the
thousands of biochemical reactions necessary for an organism to grow and survive. In this chapter,
you will learn about the major components and functions of a prototypical, generalized cell and dis‐
cover some of the different types of cells in the human body.
The Cell Membrane
Next Section
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the molecular components that make up the cell membrane
Explain the major features and properties of the cell membrane
Differentiate between materials that can and cannot diffuse through the lipid bilayer
Compare and contrast different types of passive transport with active transport, providing exam‐
ples of each
Despite differences in structure and function, all living cells in multicellular organisms have a sur‐
rounding cell membrane. As the outer layer of your skin separates your body from its environment,
the cell membrane (also known as the plasma membrane) separates the inner contents of a cell from
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 3/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
its exterior environment. This cell membrane provides a protective barrier arounIdn cthreea cseel lF aonndt Sreizgeu‐
lates which materials can pass in or out.
Structure and Composition of the Cell
Membrane
The cell membrane is an extremely pliable structure composed primarily of back-to-back phospho‐
lipids (a “bilayer”). Cholesterol is also present, which contributes to the fluidity of the membrane,
and there are various proteins embedded within the membrane that have a variety of functions.
A single phospholipid molecule has a phosphate group on one end, called the “head,” and two side-
by-side chains of fatty acids that make up the lipid tails (Figure 1. Phospholipid Structure). The
phosphate group is negatively charged, making the head polar and hydrophilic—or “water loving.”
A hydrophilic molecule (or region of a molecule) is one that is attracted to water. The phosphate
heads are thus attracted to the water molecules of both the extracellular and intracellular environ‐
ments. The lipid tails, on the other hand, are uncharged, or nonpolar, and are hydrophobic—or “wa‐
ter fearing.” A hydrophobic molecule (or region of a molecule) repels and is repelled by water.
Some lipid tails consist of saturated fatty acids and some contain unsaturated fatty acids. This com‐
bination adds to the fluidity of the tails that are constantly in motion. Phospholipids are thus amphi‐
Next Section
pathic molecules. An amphipathic molecule is one that contains both a hydrophilic and a hy‐
drophobic region. In fact, soap works to remove oil and grease stains because it has amphipathic
properties. The hydrophilic portion can dissolve in water while the hydrophobic portion can trap
grease in micelles that then can be washed away.
Phospholipid Structure
This diagram shows the structure of a phospholipid. The hydrophilic head group
is shown as a pink sphere and the two tails are shown as yellow rectangles.
Figure 1. A phospholipid molecule consists of a polar phosphate “head,” which
is hydrophilic and a non-polar lipid “tail,” which is hydrophobic. Unsaturated
fatty acids result in kinks in the hydrophobic tails.
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 4/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
The cell membrane consists of two adjacent layers of phospholipids. The lipid taIinlsc roefa osen eF olanyte Sri fzaece
the lipid tails of the other layer, meeting at the interface of the two layers. The phospholipid heads
face outward, one layer exposed to the interior of the cell and one layer exposed to the exterior
(Figure 2. Phospholipid Bilayer). Because the phosphate groups are polar and hydrophilic, they are
attracted to water in the intracellular fluid. Intracellular fluid (ICF) is the fluid interior of the cell.
The phosphate groups are also attracted to the extracellular fluid. Extracellular fluid (ECF) is the
fluid environment outside the enclosure of the cell membrane. Interstitial fluid (IF) is the term
given to extracellular fluid not contained within blood vessels. Because the lipid tails are hydropho‐
bic, they meet in the inner region of the membrane, excluding watery intracellular and extracellular
fluid from this space. The cell membrane has many proteins, as well as other lipids (such as choles‐
terol), that are associated with the phospholipid bilayer. An important feature of the membrane is
that it remains fluid; the lipids and proteins in the cell membrane are not rigidly locked in place.
Phospolipid Bilayer
This diagram shows a phospholipid bilayer. Two sets of phospholipids are ar‐
ranged such that the hydrophobic tails are facing each other and the hydrophilic
heads are facing the extracellular environment.
Figure 2. The phospholipid bilayer consists of two adjacent sheets of phospho‐
lipids, arranged tail to tail. The hydrophobic tails associate with one another,
forming the interior of the membrane. The polar heads contact the fluid inside
Next Section
and outside of the cell.
Membrane Proteins
The lipid bilayer forms the basis of the cell membrane, but it is peppered throughout with various
proteins. Two different types of proteins that are commonly associated with the cell membrane are
the integral proteins and peripheral protein (Figure 3. Cell Membrane). As its name suggests,
an integral protein is a protein that is embedded in the membrane. A channel protein is an exam‐
ple of an integral protein that selectively allows particular materials, such as certain ions, to pass
into or out of the cell.
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 5/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
Increase Font Size
Cell Membrane
This image shows a lipid bilayer with different types of proteins, lipids and
cholesterol embedded in it.
Figure 3. The cell membrane of the cell is a phospholipid bilayer containing
many different molecular components, including proteins and cholesterol, some
with carbohydrate groups attached.
Another important group of integral proteins are cell recognition proteins, which serve to mark a
cell’s identity so that it can be recognized by other cells. A receptor is a type of recognition protein
that can selectively bind a specific molecule outside the cell, and this binding induces a chemical re‐
action within the cell. A ligand is the specific molecule that binds to and activates a receptor. Some
integral proteins serve dual roles as both a receptor and an ion channel. One example of a receptor-
ligand interaction is the receptors on nerve cells that bind neurotransmitters, such as dopamine.
When a dopamine molecule binds to a dopamine receptor protein, a channel within the transmem‐
brane protein opens to allow certain ions to flow into the cell.
Some integral membrane proteins are glycoproteins. A glycoprotein is a protein that has carbohy‐
drate molecules attached, which extend into the extracellular matrix. The attached carbohydrate tags
on glycoproteins aid in cell recognition. The carbohydrates that extend from membrane proteins and
even from some membrane lipids collectively form the glycocalyx. The glycocalyx is a fuzzy-ap‐
Next Section
pearing coating around the cell formed from glycoproteins and other carbohydrates attached to the
cell membrane. The glycocalyx can have various roles. For example, it may have molecules that al‐
low the cell to bind to another cell, it may contain receptors for hormones, or it might have enzymes
to break down nutrients. The glycocalyces found in a person’s body are products of that person’s ge‐
netic makeup. They give each of the individual’s trillions of cells the “identity” of belonging in the
person’s body. This identity is the primary way that a person’s immune defense cells “know” not to
attack the person’s own body cells, but it also is the reason organs donated by another person might
be rejected.
Peripheral proteins are typically found on the inner or outer surface of the lipid bilayer but can
also be attached to the internal or external surface of an integral protein. These proteins typically
perform a specific function for the cell. Some peripheral proteins on the surface of intestinal cells,
for example, act as digestive enzymes to break down nutrients to sizes that can pass through the
cells and into the bloodstream.
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 6/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
Increase Font Size
Transport across the Cell Membrane
One of the great wonders of the cell membrane is its ability to regulate the concentration of sub‐
++ + + –
stances inside the cell. These substances include ions such as Ca , Na , K , and Cl ; nutrients in‐
cluding sugars, fatty acids, and amino acids; and waste products, particularly carbon dioxide (CO ),
2
which must leave the cell.
The membrane’s lipid bilayer structure provides the first level of control. The phospholipids are
tightly packed together, and the membrane has a hydrophobic interior. This structure causes the
membrane to be selectively permeable. A membrane that has selective permeability allows only
substances meeting certain criteria to pass through it unaided. In the case of the cell membrane, only
relatively small, nonpolar materials can move through the lipid bilayer (remember, the lipid tails of
the membrane are nonpolar). Some examples of these are other lipids, oxygen and carbon dioxide
gases, and alcohol. However, water-soluble materials—like glucose, amino acids, and electrolytes—
need some assistance to cross the membrane because they are repelled by the hydrophobic tails of
the phospholipid bilayer. All substances that move through the membrane do so by one of two gen‐
eral methods, which are categorized based on whether or not energy is required. Passive
transport is the movement of substances across the membrane without the expenditure of cellular
energy. In contrast, active transport is the movement of substances across the membrane using en‐
ergy from adenosine triphosphate (ATP).
Next Section
Passive Transport
In order to understand how substances move passively across a cell membrane, it is necessary to un‐
derstand concentration gradients and diffusion. A concentration gradient is the difference in con‐
centration of a substance across a space. Molecules (or ions) will spread/diffuse from where they are
more concentrated to where they are less concentrated until they are equally distributed in that
space. (When molecules move in this way, they are said to move down their concentration
gradient.) Diffusion is the movement of particles from an area of higher concentration to an area of
lower concentration. A couple of common examples will help to illustrate this concept. Imagine be‐
ing inside a closed bathroom. If a bottle of perfume were sprayed, the scent molecules would natu‐
rally diffuse from the spot where they left the bottle to all corners of the bathroom, and this diffusion
would go on until no more concentration gradient remains. Another example is a spoonful of sugar
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 7/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
placed in a cup of tea. Eventually the sugar will diffuse throughout the tea until nInoc creoanscee nFtornatti oSnize
gradient remains. In both cases, if the room is warmer or the tea hotter, diffusion occurs even faster
as the molecules are bumping into each other and spreading out faster than at cooler temperatures.
°
Having an internal body temperature around 98.6 F thus also aids in diffusion of particles within
the body.
Visit this link to see diffusion and how it is propelled by the kinetic energy of molecules in so‐
lution. How does temperature affect diffusion rate, and why?
Whenever a substance exists in greater concentration on one side of a semipermeable membrane,
such as the cell membranes, any substance that can move down its concentration gradient across the
membrane will do so. Consider substances that can easily diffuse through the lipid bilayer of the cell
membrane, such as the gases oxygen (O ) and CO . O generally diffuses into cells because it is
2 2 2
more concentrated outside of them, and CO typically diffuses out of cells because it is more con‐
2
centrated inside of them. Neither of these examples requires any energy on the part of the cell, and
therefore they use passive transport to move across the membrane.
Before moving on, you need to review the gases that can diffuse across a cell membrane. Because
cells rapidly use up oxygen during metabolism, there is typically a lower concentration of O inside
2
the cell than outside. As a result, oxygen will diffuse from the interstitial fluid directly through the
Next Section
lipid bilayer of the membrane and into the cytoplasm within the cell. On the other hand, because
cells produce CO as a byproduct of metabolism, CO concentrations rise within the cytoplasm;
2 2
therefore, CO will move from the cell through the lipid bilayer and into the interstitial fluid, where
2
its concentration is lower. This mechanism of molecules moving across a cell membrane from the
side where they are more concentrated to the side where they are less concentrated is a form of pas‐
sive transport called simple diffusion (Figure 4. Simple Diffusion across the Cell (Plasma)
Membrane).
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 8/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
Increase Font Size
Simple Diffusion across the Cell (Plasma) Membrane
This figure shows the simple diffusion of small non-polar molecules across the
plasma membrane. A red horizontal arrow pointing towards the right indicates the
progress of time. The nonpolar molecules are shown in blue and are present in
higher numbers in the extracellular fluid. There are a few nonpolar molecules in
the cytoplasm and their number increases with time.
Figure 4. The structure of the lipid bilayer allows small, uncharged substances
such as oxygen and carbon dioxide, and hydrophobic molecules such as lipids, to
pass through the cell membrane, down their concentration gradient, by simple
diffusion.
Large polar or ionic molecules, which are hydrophilic, cannot easily cross the phospholipid bilayer.
Very small polar molecules, such as water, can cross via simple diffusion due to their small size.
Charged atoms or molecules of any size cannot cross the cell membrane via simple diffusion as the
charges are repelled by the hydrophobic tails in the interior of the phospholipid bilayer. Solutes dis‐
solved in water on either side of the cell membrane will tend to diffuse down their concentration
gradients, but because most substances cannot pass freely through the lipid bilayer of the cell mem‐
brane, their movement is restricted to protein channels and specialized transport mechanisms in the
membrane. Facilitated diffusion is the diffusion process used for those substances that cannot cross
Next Section
the lipid bilayer due to their size, charge, and/or polarity (Figure 5. Facilitated Diffusion). A com‐
mon example of facilitated diffusion is the movement of glucose into the cell, where it is used to
make ATP. Although glucose can be more concentrated outside of a cell, it cannot cross the lipid bi‐
layer via simple diffusion because it is both large and polar. To resolve this, a specialized carrier
protein called the glucose transporter will transfer glucose molecules into the cell to facilitate its in‐
ward diffusion.
Facilitated Diffusion
This diagram shows the different means of facilitated diffusion across the
plasma membrane. In the top panel, a channel protein is shown to allow the trans‐
port of solutes across the membrane. In the bottom panel, the membrane contains
carrier proteins in addition to channel proteins.
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 9/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
Increase Font Size
Figure 5. (a) Facilitated diffusion of substances crossing the cell (plasma) mem‐
brane takes place with the help of proteins such as channel proteins and carrier
proteins. Channel proteins are less selective than carrier proteins, and usually
mildly discriminate between their cargo based on size and charge. (b) Carrier
proteins are more selective, often only allowing one particular type of molecule to
cross.
+
As an example, even though sodium ions (Na ) are highly concentrated outside of cells, these elec‐
trolytes are charged and cannot pass through the nonpolar lipid bilayer of the membrane. Their dif‐
+
fusion is facilitated by membrane proteins that form sodium channels (or “pores”), so that Na ions
can move down their concentration gradient from outside the cells to inside the cells. There are
many other solutes that must undergo facilitated diffusion to move into a cell, such as amino acids,
or to move out of a cell, such as wastes. Because facilitated diffusion is a passive process, it does
not require energy expenditure by the cell.
Water also can move freely across the cell membrane of all cells, either through protein channels or
by slipping between the lipid tails of the membrane itself. Osmosis is the diffusion of water through
a semipermeable membrane (Figure 6. Osmosis).
Osmosis Next Section
This figure shows the diffusion of water through osmosis. The left panel shows
a beaker with water and different solute concentrations. A semipermeable mem‐
brane is present in the middle of the beaker. In the right panel, the water concen‐
tration is higher to the right of the semipermeable membrane.
Figure 6. Osmosis is the diffusion of water through a semipermeable membrane
down its concentration gradient. If a membrane is permeable to water, though not
to a solute, water will equalize its own concentration by diffusing to the side of
lower water concentration (and thus the side of higher solute concentration). In
the beaker on the left, the solution on the right side of the membrane is
hypertonic.
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 10/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
The movement of water molecules is not itself regulated by cells, so it is importaInnct rtehaast ec eFlolns ta Srei zeex‐
posed to an environment in which the concentration of solutes outside of the cells (in the extracellu‐
lar fluid) is equal to the concentration of solutes inside the cells (in the cytoplasm). Two solutions
that have the same concentration of solutes are said to be isotonic (equal tension). When cells and
their extracellular environments are isotonic, the concentration of water molecules is the same out‐
side and inside the cells, and the cells maintain their normal shape (and function).
Osmosis occurs when there is an imbalance of solutes outside of a cell versus inside the cell. A solu‐
tion that has a higher concentration of solutes than another solution is said to be hypertonic, and
water molecules tend to diffuse into a hypertonic solution (Figure 7. Concentration of Solutions).
Cells in a hypertonic solution will shrivel as water leaves the cell via osmosis. In contrast, a solution
that has a lower concentration of solutes than another solution is said to be hypotonic, and water
molecules tend to diffuse out of a hypotonic solution. Cells in a hypotonic solution will take on too
much water and swell, with the risk of eventually bursting. A critical aspect of homeostasis in living
things is to create an internal environment in which all of the body’s cells are in an isotonic solution.
Various organ systems, particularly the kidneys, work to maintain this homeostasis.
Concentration of Solutions
Figure 7. A hypertonic solution has a solute concentration higher than another
solution. An isotonic solution has a solute concentration equal to another solu‐
Next Section
tion. A hypotonic solution has a solute concentration lower than another solution.
Another mechanism besides diffusion to passively transport materials between compartments is fil‐
tration. Unlike diffusion of a substance from where it is more concentrated to less concentrated, fil‐
tration uses a hydrostatic pressure gradient that pushes the fluid—and the solutes within it—from a
higher pressure area to a lower pressure area. Filtration is an extremely important process in the
body. For example, the circulatory system uses filtration to move plasma and substances across the
endothelial lining of capillaries and into surrounding tissues, supplying cells with the nutrients.
Filtration pressure in the kidneys provides the mechanism to remove wastes from the bloodstream.
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 11/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
Increase Font Size
Active Transport
For all of the transport methods described above, the cell expends no energy. Membrane proteins
that aid in the passive transport of substances do so without the use of ATP. During active transport,
ATP is required to move a substance across a membrane, often with the help of protein carriers, and
usually against its concentration gradient.
One of the most common types of active transport involves proteins that serve as pumps. The word
“pump” probably conjures up thoughts of using energy to pump up the tire of a bicycle or a basket‐
ball. Similarly, energy from ATP is required for these membrane proteins to transport substances—
molecules or ions—across the membrane, usually against their concentration gradients (from an
area of low concentration to an area of high concentration).
+ +
The sodium-potassium pump, which is also called Na /K ATPase, transports sodium out of a cell
+ +
while moving potassium into the cell. The Na /K pump is an important ion pump found in the
membranes of many types of cells. These pumps are particularly abundant in nerve cells, which are
constantly pumping out sodium ions and pulling in potassium ions to maintain an electrical gradient
across their cell membranes. An electrical gradient is a difference in electrical charge across a
space. In the case of nerve cells, for example, the electrical gradient exists between the inside and
outside of the cell, with the inside being negatively-charged (at around -70 mV) relative to the out‐
+ +
side. The negative electrical gradient is maintained because each Na /K pump moves three
Next Section
+ +
Na ions out of the cell and two K ions into the cell for each ATP molecule that is used (Figure 8.
Sodium-Potassium Pump). This process is so important for nerve cells that it accounts for the major‐
ity of their ATP usage.
Sodium-Potassium Pump
This diagram shows many sodium potassium pumps embedded in the mem‐
brane. Potassium is pumped into the cytoplasm and sodium is pumped out of the
cytoplasm.
Figure 8. The sodium-potassium pump is found in many cell (plasma) mem‐
branes. Powered by ATP, the pump moves sodium and potassium ions in opposite
directions, each against its concentration gradient. In a single cycle of the pump,
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 12/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
Increase Font Size
three sodium ions are extruded from and two potassium ions are imported into the
cell.
Active transport pumps can also work together with other active or passive transport systems to
move substances across the membrane. For example, the sodium-potassium pump maintains a high
concentration of sodium ions outside of the cell. Therefore, if the cell needs sodium ions, all it has to
do is open a passive sodium channel, as the concentration gradient of the sodium ions will drive
them to diffuse into the cell. In this way, the action of an active transport pump (the sodium-potas‐
sium pump) powers the passive transport of sodium ions by creating a concentration gradient. When
active transport powers the transport of another substance in this way, it is called secondary active
transport.
Symporters are secondary active transporters that move two substances in the same direction. For
example, the sodium-glucose symporter uses sodium ions to “pull” glucose molecules into the cell.
Because cells store glucose for energy, glucose is typically at a higher concentration inside of the
cell than outside. However, due to the action of the sodium-potassium pump, sodium ions will easily
diffuse into the cell when the symporter is opened. The flood of sodium ions through the symporter
provides the energy that allows glucose to move through the symporter and into the cell, against its
concentration gradient.
Conversely, antiporters are secondary active transport systems that transport substances in opposite
Next Section
directions. For example, the sodium-hydrogen ion antiporter uses the energy from the inward flood
of sodium ions to move hydrogen ions (H+) out of the cell. The sodium-hydrogen antiporter is used
to maintain the pH of the cell’s interior.
Other forms of active transport do not involve membrane carriers. Endocytosis (bringing “into the
cell”) is the process of a cell ingesting material by enveloping it in a portion of its cell membrane,
and then pinching off that portion of membrane (Figure 9. Three Forms of Endocytosis). Once
pinched off, the portion of membrane and its contents becomes an independent, intracellular vesicle.
A vesicle is a membranous sac—a spherical and hollow organelle bounded by a lipid bilayer mem‐
brane. Endocytosis often brings materials into the cell that must to be broken down or
digested. Phagocytosis (“cell eating”) is the endocytosis of large particles. Many immune cells en‐
gage in phagocytosis of invading pathogens. Like little Pac-men, their job is to patrol body tissues
for unwanted matter, such as invading bacterial cells, phagocytize them, and digest them. In contrast
to phagocytosis, pinocytosis (“cell drinking”) brings fluid containing dissolved substances into a
cell through membrane vesicles.
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 13/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
Increase Font Size
Three Forms of Endocytosis
This image shows the three different types of endocytosis. The left panel shows
phagocytosis, where a large particle is seen to be engulfed by the membrane into a
vacuole. In the middle panel, pinocytosis is shown, where a small particle is en‐
gulfed into a vesicle. In the right panel, receptor-mediated endocytosis is shown;
the ligand binds to the receptor and is then engulfed into a coated vesicle.
Figure 9. Endocytosis is a form of active transport in which a cell envelopes ex‐
tracellular materials using its cell membrane. (a) In phagocytosis, which is rela‐
tively nonselective, the cell takes in a large particle. (b) In pinocytosis, the cell
takes in small particles in fluid. (c) In contrast, receptor-mediated endocytosis is
quite selective. When external receptors bind a specific ligand, the cell responds
by endocytosing the ligand.
Phagocytosis and pinocytosis take in large portions of extracellular material, and they are typically
not highly selective in the substances they bring in. Cells regulate the endocytosis of specific sub‐
stances via receptor-mediated endocytosis. Receptor-mediated endocytosis is endocytosis by a
portion of the cell membrane that contains many receptors that are specific for a certain substance.
Once the surface receptors have bound sufficient amounts of the specific substance (the receptor’s
ligand), the cell will endocytose the part of the cell membrane containing the receptor-Nliegxatn Sde cctoiomn‐
plexes. Iron, a required component of hemoglobin, is endocytosed by red blood cells in this way.
Iron is bound to a protein called transferrin in the blood. Specific transferrin receptors on red blood
cell surfaces bind the iron-transferrin molecules, and the cell endocytoses the receptor-ligand
complexes.
In contrast with endocytosis, exocytosis (taking “out of the cell”) is the process of a cell exporting
material using vesicular transport (Figure 10. Exocytosis). Many cells manufacture substances that
must be secreted, like a factory manufacturing a product for export. These substances are typically
packaged into membrane-bound vesicles within the cell. When the vesicle membrane fuses with the
cell membrane, the vesicle releases it contents into the interstitial fluid. The vesicle membrane then
becomes part of the cell membrane. Cells of the stomach and pancreas produce and secrete digestive
enzymes through exocytosis (Figure 11. Pancreatic Cells’ Enzyme Products). Endocrine cells pro‐
duce and secrete hormones that are sent throughout the body, and certain immune cells produce and
secrete large amounts of histamine, a chemical important for immune responses.
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 14/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
Increase Font Size
Exocytosis
This figure shows the process of exocytosis. A vesicle is shown fusing with the
membrane and then releasing its contents into the extracellular fluid.
Figure 10. Exocytosis is much like endocytosis in reverse. Material destined for
export is packaged into a vesicle inside the cell. The membrane of the vesicle
fuses with the cell membrane, and the contents are released into the extracellular
space.
Pancreatic Cells’ Enzyme Products
This micrograph shows the structure of a pancreatic acinar cell and the location
of secretory vesicles.
Figure 11. The pancreatic acinar cells produce and secrete many enzymes that di‐
gest food. The tiny black granules in this electron micrograph are secretory vesi‐
cles filled with enzymes that will be exported from the cells via exocytosis. LM ×
2900. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical
School © 2012)
Next Section
View the University of Michigan WebScope
at http://virtualslides.med.umich.edu/Histology/EMsmallCharts/3%20Image%20Scope%20fin
als/226%20-%20Pancreas_001.svs/view.apml to explore the tissue sample in greater detail.
DISEASES OF THE…
Cell: Cystic Fibrosis
Cystic fibrosis (CF) affects approximately 30,000 people in the United States, with
about 1,000 new cases reported each year. The genetic disease is most well known for
its damage to the lungs, causing breathing difficulties and chronic lung infections, but it
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 15/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
also affects the liver, pancreas, and intestines. Only about 50 years ago, theIn pcrroegansoe sFiosnt Size
for children born with CF was very grim—a life expectancy rarely over 10 years. Today,
with advances in medical treatment, many CF patients live into their 30s.
The symptoms of CF result from a malfunctioning membrane ion channel called the
cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator, or CFTR. In healthy people, the
–
CFTR protein is an integral membrane protein that transports Cl ions out of the cell. In
a person who has CF, the gene for the CFTR is mutated, thus, the cell manufactures a
defective channel protein that typically is not incorporated into the membrane, but is in‐
stead degraded by the cell.
–
The CFTR requires ATP in order to function, making its Cl transport a form of active
–
transport. This characteristic puzzled researchers for a long time because the Cl ions
are actually flowing down their concentration gradient when transported out of cells.
Active transport generally pumps ions against their concentration gradient, but the
CFTR presents an exception to this rule.
– –
In normal lung tissue, the movement of Cl out of the cell maintains a Cl -rich, nega‐
tively charged environment immediately outside of the cell. This is particularly impor‐
tant in the epithelial lining of the respiratory system. Respiratory epithelial cells secrete
mucus, which serves to trap dust, bacteria, and other debris. A cilium (plural = cilia) is
one of the hair-like appendages found on certain cells. Cilia on the epithelial cells move
the mucus and its trapped particles up the airways away from the lungs and towaNrdex tth Seection
outside. In order to be effectively moved upward, the mucus cannot be too viscous;
–
rather it must have a thin, watery consistency. The transport of Cl and the maintenance
+
of an electronegative environment outside of the cell attract positive ions such as Na to
– +
the extracellular space. The accumulation of both Cl and Na ions in the extracellular
space creates solute-rich mucus, which has a low concentration of water molecules. As a
result, through osmosis, water moves from cells and extracellular matrix into the mucus,
“thinning” it out. This is how, in a normal respiratory system, the mucus is kept suffi‐
ciently watered-down to be propelled out of the respiratory system.
–
If the CFTR channel is absent, Cl ions are not transported out of the cell in adequate
numbers, thus preventing them from drawing positive ions. The absence of ions in the
secreted mucus results in the lack of a normal water concentration gradient. Thus, there
is no osmotic pressure pulling water into the mucus. The resulting mucus is thick and
sticky, and the ciliated epithelia cannot effectively remove it from the respiratory sys‐
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 16/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
tem. Passageways in the lungs become blocked with mucus, along with theIn dcerebarisse i tF ocnart‐ Size
ries. Bacterial infections occur more easily because bacterial cells are not effectively
carried away from the lungs.
Chapter Review
The cell membrane provides a barrier around the cell, separating its internal components from the
extracellular environment. It is composed of a phospholipid bilayer, with hydrophobic internal lipid
“tails” and hydrophilic external phosphate “heads.” Various membrane proteins are scattered
throughout the bilayer, both inserted within it and attached to it peripherally. The cell membrane is
selectively permeable, allowing only a limited number of materials to diffuse through its lipid bi‐
layer. All materials that cross the membrane do so using passive (non energy-requiring) or active
(energy-requiring) transport processes. During passive transport, materials move by simple diffusion
or by facilitated diffusion through the membrane, down their concentration gradient. Water passes
through the membrane in a diffusion process called osmosis. During active transport, energy is ex‐
pended to assist material movement across the membrane in a direction against their concentration
gradient. Active transport may take place with the help of protein pumps or through the use of
Next Section
vesicles.
The Cytoplasm and Cellular Organelles
By the end of this section you will be able to:
Describe the structure and function of the cellular organelles associated with the endomembrane
system, including the endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, and lysosomes
Describe the structure and function of mitochondria and peroxisomes
Explain the three components of the cytoskeleton, including their composition and functions
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 17/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
Now that you have learned that the cell membrane surrounds all cells, you can dIinvcer ienassied eF oonf ta S pizroe‐
totypical human cell to learn about its internal components and their functions. All living cells in
multicellular organisms contain an internal cytoplasmic compartment, and a nucleus within the
cytoplasm. Cytosol, the jelly-like substance within the cell, provides the fluid medium necessary for
biochemical reactions. Eukaryotic cells, including all animal cells, also contain various cellular or‐
ganelles. An organelle (“little organ”) is one of several different types of membrane-enclosed bod‐
ies in the cell, each performing a unique function. Just as the various bodily organs work together in
harmony to perform all of a human’s functions, the many different cellular organelles work together
to keep the cell healthy and performing all of its important functions. The organelles and cytosol,
taken together, compose the cell’s cytoplasm. The nucleus is a cell’s central organelle, which con‐
tains the cell’s DNA (Figure 1. Prototypical Human Cell).
Prototypical Human Cell
This diagram shows an animal cell with all the intracellular organelles labeled.
Figure 1. While this image is not indicative of any one particular human cell, it
is a prototypical example of a cell containing the primary organelles and internal
structures.
Organelles of the Endomembrane System
Next Section
A set of three major organelles together form a system within the cell called the endomembrane sys‐
tem. These organelles work together to perform various cellular jobs, including the task of produc‐
ing, packaging, and exporting certain cellular products. The organelles of the endomembrane system
include the endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, and vesicles.
Endoplasmic Reticulum
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a system of channels that is continuous with the nuclear mem‐
brane (or “envelope”) covering the nucleus and composed of the same lipid bilayer material. The
ER can be thought of as a series of winding thoroughfares similar to the waterway canals in Venice.
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 18/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
The ER provides passages throughout much of the cell that function in transportIinncgr,e saysnet hFeosnizt iSnigz,e
and storing materials. The winding structure of the ER results in a large membranous surface area
that supports its many functions (Figure 2. Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER)).
Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER)
This figure shows structure of the endoplasmic reticulum. The diagram high‐
lights the rough and smooth endoplasmic reticulum and the nucleus is labeled.
Two micrographs show the structure of the endoplasmic reticulum in detail. The
left micrograph shows the rough endoplasmic reticulum in a pancreatic cell and
the right micrograph shows a smooth endoplasmic reticulum.
Figure 2. (a) The ER is a winding network of thin membranous sacs found in
close association with the cell nucleus. The smooth and rough endoplasmic retic‐
ula are very different in appearance and function (source: mouse tissue). (b)
Rough ER is studded with numerous ribosomes, which are sites of protein synthe‐
sis (source: mouse tissue). EM × 110,000. (c) Smooth ER synthesizes phospho‐
lipids, steroid hormones, regulates the concentration of cellular Ca2+, metabo‐
lizes some carbohydrates, and breaks down certain toxins (source: mouse tissue).
EM × 110,510. (Micrographs provided by the Regents of University of Michigan
Next Section
Medical School © 2012)
Endoplasmic reticulum can exist in two forms: rough ER and smooth ER. These two types of ER
perform some very different functions and can be found in very different amounts depending on the
type of cell. Rough ER (RER) is so-called because its membrane is dotted with embedded granules
—organelles called ribosomes, giving the RER a bumpy appearance. A ribosome is an organelle
that serves as the site of protein synthesis. It is composed of two ribosomal RNA subunits that wrap
around mRNA to start the process of translation, followed by protein synthesis. Smooth ER (SER)
lacks these ribosomes.
One of the main functions of the smooth ER is in the synthesis of lipids. The smooth ER synthesizes
phospholipids, the main component of biological membranes, as well as steroid hormones. For this
reason, cells that produce large quantities of such hormones, such as those of the female ovaries and
male testes, contain large amounts of smooth ER. In addition to lipid synthesis, the smooth ER also
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 19/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
sequesters (i.e., stores) and regulates the concentration of cellular Ca2+ , a functiIonnc reexatrseem Feolnyt iSmizpeor‐
2+
tant in cells of the nervous system where Ca is the trigger for neurotransmitter release. The
smooth ER additionally metabolizes some carbohydrates and performs a detoxification role, break‐
ing down certain toxins.
In contrast with the smooth ER, the primary job of the rough ER is the synthesis and modification of
proteins destined for the cell membrane or for export from the cell. For this protein synthesis, many
ribosomes attach to the ER (giving it the studded appearance of rough ER). Typically, a protein is
synthesized within the ribosome and released inside the channel of the rough ER, where sugars can
be added to it (by a process called glycosylation) before it is transported within a vesicle to the next
stage in the packaging and shipping process: the Golgi apparatus.
The Golgi Apparatus
The Golgi apparatus is responsible for sorting, modifying, and shipping off the products that come
from the rough ER, much like a post-office. The Golgi apparatus looks like stacked flattened discs,
almost like stacks of oddly shaped pancakes. Like the ER, these discs are membranous. The Golgi
apparatus has two distinct sides, each with a different role. One side of the apparatus receives prod‐
ucts in vesicles. These products are sorted through the apparatus, and then they are released from the
opposite side after being repackaged into new vesicles. If the product is to be exported from the cell,
the vesicle migrates to the cell surface and fuses to the cell membrane, and the cargo isN seexct rSeetcetdion
(Figure 3. Golgi Apparatus).
Golgi Apparatus
This figure shows the structure of the Golgi apparatus. The diagram in the left
panel shows the location and structure of the Golgi apparatus. The right panel
shows a micrograph showing the folds of the Golgi in detail.
Figure 3. (a) The Golgi apparatus manipulates products from the rough ER, and
also produces new organelles called lysosomes. Proteins and other products of the
ER are sent to the Golgi apparatus, which organizes, modifies, packages, and tags
them. Some of these products are transported to other areas of the cell and some
are exported from the cell through exocytosis. Enzymatic proteins are packaged as
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 20/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
Increase Font Size
new lysosomes (or packaged and sent for fusion with existing lysosomes). (b) An
electron micrograph of the Golgi apparatus.
Lysosomes
Some of the protein products packaged by the Golgi include digestive enzymes that are meant to re‐
main inside the cell for use in breaking down certain materials. The enzyme-containing vesicles re‐
leased by the Golgi may form new lysosomes, or fuse with existing, lysosomes. A lysosome is an
organelle that contains enzymes that break down and digest unneeded cellular components, such as
a damaged organelle. (A lysosome is similar to a wrecking crew that takes down old and unsound
buildings in a neighborhood.) Autophagy (“self-eating”) is the process of a cell digesting its own
structures. Lysosomes are also important for breaking down foreign material. For example, when
certain immune defense cells (white blood cells) phagocytize bacteria, the bacterial cell is trans‐
ported into a lysosome and digested by the enzymes inside. As one might imagine, such phagocytic
defense cells contain large numbers of lysosomes.
Under certain circumstances, lysosomes perform a more grand and dire function. In the case of
damaged or unhealthy cells, lysosomes can be triggered to open up and release their digestive en‐
zymes into the cytoplasm of the cell, killing the cell. This “self-destruct” mechanism is called autol‐
ysis, and makes the process of cell death controlled (a mechanism called “apoptosis”).
Next Section
Watch this video to learn about the endomembrane system, which includes the rough and
smooth ER and the Golgi body as well as lysosomes and vesicles. What is the primary role of
the endomembrane system?
Organelles for Energy Production and
Detoxification
In addition to the jobs performed by the endomembrane system, the cell has many other important
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 21/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
functions. Just as you must consume nutrients to provide yourself with energy, sIon mcrueasts eea Fcohn ot fS yizoeur
cells take in nutrients, some of which convert to chemical energy that can be used to power bio‐
chemical reactions. Another important function of the cell is detoxification. Humans take in all sorts
of toxins from the environment and also produce harmful chemicals as byproducts of cellular pro‐
cesses. Cells called hepatocytes in the liver detoxify many of these toxins.
Mitochondria
A mitochondrion (plural = mitochondria) is a membranous, bean-shaped organelle that is the “en‐
ergy transformer” of the cell. Mitochondria consist of an outer lipid bilayer membrane as well as an
additional inner lipid bilayer membrane (Figure 4. Mitochondrion). The inner membrane is highly
folded into winding structures with a great deal of surface area, called cristae. It is along this inner
membrane that a series of proteins, enzymes, and other molecules perform the biochemical reactions
of cellular respiration. These reactions convert energy stored in nutrient molecules (such as glucose)
into adenosine triphosphate (ATP), which provides usable cellular energy to the cell. Cells use ATP
constantly, and so the mitochondria are constantly at work. Oxygen molecules are required during
cellular respiration, which is why you must constantly breathe it in. One of the organ systems in the
body that uses huge amounts of ATP is the muscular system because ATP is required to sustain mus‐
cle contraction. As a result, muscle cells are packed full of mitochondria. Nerve cells also need large
quantities of ATP to run their sodium-potassium pumps. Therefore, an individual neuron will be
Next Section
loaded with over a thousand mitochondria. On the other hand, a bone cell, which is not nearly as
metabolically-active, might only have a couple hundred mitochondria.
Mitochondrion
This figure shows the structure of a mitochondrion. The inner and outer mem‐
brane, the cristae and the intermembrane space are labeled. The right panel shows
a micrograph with the structure of a mitochondrion in detail.
Figure 4. The mitochondria are the energy-conversion factories of the cell. (a) A
mitochondrion is composed of two separate lipid bilayer membranes. Along the
inner membrane are various molecules that work together to produce ATP, the
cell’s major energy currency. (b) An electron micrograph of mitochondria. EM ×
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 22/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
Increase Font Size
236,000. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical
School © 2012)
Peroxisomes
Like lysosomes, a peroxisome is a membrane-bound cellular organelle that contains mostly en‐
zymes (Figure 5. Peroxisome). Peroxisomes perform a couple of different functions, including lipid
metabolism and chemical detoxification. In contrast to the digestive enzymes found in lysosomes,
the enzymes within peroxisomes serve to transfer hydrogen atoms from various molecules to oxy‐
gen, producing hydrogen peroxide (H O ). In this way, peroxisomes neutralize poisons such as al‐
2 2
cohol. In order to appreciate the importance of peroxisomes, it is necessary to understand the con‐
cept of reactive oxygen species.
Peroxisome
This diagram shows a peroxisome, which is a vesicular structure with a lipid bi‐
layer on the outside and a crystalline core on the inside.
Figure 5. Peroxisomes are membrane-bound organelles that contain an abun‐
dance of enzymes for detoxifying harmful substances and lipid metabolism.
Next Section
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as peroxides and free radicals are the highly reactive products
of many normal cellular processes, including the mitochondrial reactions that produce ATP and oxy‐
– –
gen metabolism. Examples of ROS include the hydroxyl radical OH, H O , and superoxide O O .
2 2 2 2
Some ROS are important for certain cellular functions, such as cell signaling processes and immune
responses against foreign substances. Free radicals are reactive because they contain free unpaired
electrons; they can easily oxidize other molecules throughout the cell, causing cellular damage and
even cell death. Free radicals are thought to play a role in many destructive processes in the body,
from cancer to coronary artery disease.
Peroxisomes, on the other hand, oversee reactions that neutralize free radicals. Peroxisomes produce
large amounts of the toxic H O in the process, but peroxisomes contain enzymes that convert
2 2
H O into water and oxygen. These byproducts are safely released into the cytoplasm. Like minia‐
2 2
ture sewage treatment plants, peroxisomes neutralize harmful toxins so that they do not wreak havoc
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 23/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
in the cells. The liver is the organ primarily responsible for detoxifying the bloodIn bcerefoarsee iFt otrnatv Seilzse
throughout the body, and liver cells contain an exceptionally high number of peroxisomes.
Defense mechanisms such as detoxification within the peroxisome and certain cellular antioxidants
serve to neutralize many of these molecules. Some vitamins and other substances, found primarily
in fruits and vegetables, have antioxidant properties. Antioxidants work by being oxidized them‐
selves, halting the destructive reaction cascades initiated by the free radicals. Sometimes though,
ROS accumulate beyond the capacity of such defenses.
Oxidative stress is the term used to describe damage to cellular components caused by ROS. Due to
their characteristic unpaired electrons, ROS can set off chain reactions where they remove electrons
from other molecules, which then become oxidized and reactive, and do the same to other mole‐
cules, causing a chain reaction. ROS can cause permanent damage to cellular lipids, proteins, carbo‐
hydrates, and nucleic acids. Damaged DNA can lead to genetic mutations and even cancer.
A mutation is a change in the nucleotide sequence in a gene within a cell’s DNA, potentially alter‐
ing the protein coded by that gene. Other diseases believed to be triggered or exacerbated by ROS
include Alzheimer’s disease, cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, Parkinson’s disease, arthritis,
Huntington’s disease, and schizophrenia, among many others. It is noteworthy that these diseases
are largely age-related. Many scientists believe that oxidative stress is a major contributor to the ag‐
ing process.
Next Section
AGING AND THE…
Cell: The Free Radical Theory
The free radical theory on aging was originally proposed in the 1950s, and still remains
under debate. Generally speaking, the free radical theory of aging suggests that accumu‐
lated cellular damage from oxidative stress contributes to the physiological and anatom‐
ical effects of aging. There are two significantly different versions of this theory: one
states that the aging process itself is a result of oxidative damage, and the other states
that oxidative damage causes age-related disease and disorders. The latter version of the
theory is more widely accepted than the former. However, many lines of evidence sug‐
gest that oxidative damage does contribute to the aging process. Research has shown
that reducing oxidative damage can result in a longer lifespan in certain organisms such
as yeast, worms, and fruit flies. Conversely, increasing oxidative damage can shorten the
lifespan of mice and worms. Interestingly, a manipulation called calorie-restriction
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 24/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
(moderately restricting the caloric intake) has been shown to increase life sInpcarne ains es oFmonet Size
laboratory animals. It is believed that this increase is at least in part due to a reduction of
oxidative stress. However, a long-term study of primates with calorie-restriction showed
no increase in their lifespan. A great deal of additional research will be required to better
understand the link between reactive oxygen species and aging.
The Cytoskeleton
Much like the bony skeleton structurally supports the human body, the cytoskeleton helps the cells
to maintain their structural integrity. The cytoskeleton is a group of fibrous proteins that provide
structural support for cells, but this is only one of the functions of the cytoskeleton. Cytoskeletal
components are also critical for cell motility, cell reproduction, and transportation of substances
within the cell.
The cytoskeleton forms a complex thread-like network throughout the cell consisting of three differ‐
ent kinds of protein-based filaments: microfilaments, intermediate filaments, and microtubules
(Figure 6. The Three Components of the Cytoskeleton). The thickest of the three is the micro‐
Next Section
tubule, a structural filament composed of subunits of a protein called tubulin. Microtubules main‐
tain cell shape and structure, help resist compression of the cell, and play a role in positioning the
organelles within the cell. Microtubules also make up two types of cellular appendages important
for motion: cilia and flagella. Cilia are found on many cells of the body, including the epithelial
cells that line the airways of the respiratory system. Cilia move rhythmically; they beat constantly,
moving waste materials such as dust, mucus, and bacteria upward through the airways, away from
the lungs and toward the mouth. Beating cilia on cells in the female fallopian tubes move egg cells
from the ovary towards the uterus. A flagellum (plural = flagella) is an appendage larger than a cil‐
ium and specialized for cell locomotion. The only flagellated cell in humans is the sperm cell that
must propel itself towards female egg cells.
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 25/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
Increase Font Size
The Three Components of the Cytoskeleton
This figure shows the different cytoskeletal components in an animal cell. The
left panel shows the microtubules with the structure of the column formed by
tubulin dimers. The middle panel shows the actin filaments and the helical struc‐
ture formed by the filaments. The right panel shows the fibrous structure of the in‐
termediate filaments with the different keratins coiled together.
Figure 6. The cytoskeleton consists of (a) microtubules, (b) microfilaments, and
(c) intermediate filaments. The cytoskeleton plays an important role in maintain‐
ing cell shape and structure, promoting cellular movement, and aiding cell
division.
A very important function of microtubules is to set the paths (somewhat like railroad tracks) along
which the genetic material can be pulled (a process requiring ATP) during cell division, so that each
new daughter cell receives the appropriate set of chromosomes. Two short, identical microtubule
structures called centrioles are found near the nucleus of cells. A centriole can serve as the cellular
origin point for microtubules extending outward as cilia or flagella or can assist with the separation
of DNA during cell division. Microtubules grow out from the centrioles by adding more tubulin sub‐
units, like adding additional links to a chain.
Next Section
In contrast with microtubules, the microfilament is a thinner type of cytoskeletal filament
(see Figure 6. The Three Components of the Cytoskeleton (b)). Actin, a protein that forms chains, is
the primary component of these microfilaments. Actin fibers, twisted chains of actin filaments, con‐
stitute a large component of muscle tissue and, along with the protein myosin, are responsible for
muscle contraction. Like microtubules, actin filaments are long chains of single subunits (called
actin subunits). In muscle cells, these long actin strands, called thin filaments, are “pulled” by thick
filaments of the myosin protein to contract the cell.
Actin also has an important role during cell division. When a cell is about to split in half during cell
division, actin filaments work with myosin to create a cleavage furrow that eventually splits the cell
down the middle, forming two new cells from the original cell.
The final cytoskeletal filament is the intermediate filament. As its name would suggest, an interme‐
diate filament is a filament intermediate in thickness between the microtubules and microfilaments
(see Figure 6. The Three Components of the Cytoskeleton (c)). Intermediate filaments are made up
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 26/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
of long fibrous subunits of a protein called keratin that are wound together like tIhnec trheraesaed Fso tnhta tS cizoem‐
pose a rope. Intermediate filaments, in concert with the microtubules, are important for maintaining
cell shape and structure. Unlike the microtubules, which resist compression, intermediate filaments
resist tension—the forces that pull apart cells. There are many cases in which cells are prone to ten‐
sion, such as when epithelial cells of the skin are compressed, tugging them in different directions.
Intermediate filaments help anchor organelles together within a cell and also link cells to other cells
by forming special cell-to-cell junctions.
Chapter Review
The internal environmental of a living cell is made up of a fluid, jelly-like substance called cytosol,
which consists mainly of water, but also contains various dissolved nutrients and other molecules.
The cell contains an array of cellular organelles, each one performing a unique function and helping
to maintain the health and activity of the cell. The cytosol and organelles together compose the cell’s
cytoplasm. Most organelles are surrounded by a lipid membrane similar to the cell membrane of the
cell. The endoplasmic reticulum (ER), Golgi apparatus, and lysosomes share a functional connectiv‐
ity and are collectively referred to as the endomembrane system. There are two types of ER: smooth
and rough. While the smooth ER performs many functions, including lipid synthesis and ion stor‐
age, the rough ER is mainly responsible for protein synthesis using its associated ribosomes. The
rough ER sends newly made proteins to the Golgi apparatus where they are modified and packaged
Next Section
for delivery to various locations within or outside of the cell. Some of these protein products are en‐
zymes destined to break down unwanted material and are packaged as lysosomes for use inside the
cell.
Cells also contain mitochondria and peroxisomes, which are the organelles responsible for produc‐
ing the cell’s energy supply and detoxifying certain chemicals, respectively. Biochemical reactions
within mitochondria transform energy-carrying molecules into the usable form of cellular energy
known as ATP. Peroxisomes contain enzymes that transform harmful substances such as free radi‐
cals into oxygen and water. Cells also contain a miniaturized “skeleton” of protein filaments that ex‐
tend throughout its interior. Three different kinds of filaments compose this cytoskeleton (in order of
increasing thickness): microfilaments, intermediate filaments, and microtubules. Each cytoskeletal
component performs unique functions as well as provides a supportive framework for the cell.
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 27/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
Increase Font Size
The Nucleus and DNA Replication
By the end of this section you will be able to:
Describe the structure and features of the nuclear membrane
List the contents of the nucleus
Explain the organization of the DNA molecule within the nucleus
Describe the process of DNA replication
The nucleus is the largest and most prominent of a cell’s organelles (Figure 1. The Nucleus). The
nucleus is generally considered the control center of the cell because it stores all of the genetic in‐
structions for manufacturing proteins. Interestingly, some cells in the body, such as muscle cells,
contain more than one nucleus (Figure 3. Red Blood Cell Extruding Its Nucleus), which is known as
multinucleated. Other cells, such as mammalian red blood cells (RBCs), do not contain nuclei at all.
RBCs eject their nuclei as they mature, making space for the large numbers of hemoglobin mole‐
cules that carry oxygen throughout the body (Figure 3. Red Blood Cell Extruding Its Nucleus).
Without nuclei, the life span of RBCs is short, and so the body must produce new ones constantly.
Next Section
The Nucleus
This figure shows the structure of the nucleus. The nucleolus is inside the nu‐
cleus, surrounded by the chromatin and covered by the nuclear envelope.
Figure 1. The nucleus is the control center of the cell. The nucleus of living cells
contains the genetic material that determines the entire structure and function of
that cell.
Multinucleate Muscle Cell
This micrograph shows a muscle cell with multiple nuclei.
Figure 2. Unlike cardiac muscle cells and smooth muscle cells, which have a sin‐
gle nucleus, a skeletal muscle cell contains many nuclei, and is referred to as
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 28/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
Increase Font Size
“multinucleated.” These muscle cells are long and fibrous (often referred to as
muscle fibers). During development, many smaller cells fuse to form a mature
muscle fiber. The nuclei of the fused cells are conserved in the mature cell, thus
imparting a multinucleate characteristic to mature muscle cells. LM × 104.3.
(Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School
© 2012)
View the University of Michigan WebScope
at http://141.214.65.171/Histology/Basic%20Tissues/Muscle/058thin_HISTO_83X.svs/view.a
pml to explore the tissue sample in greater detail.
Red Blood Cell Extruding Its Nucleus
This set of micrographs shows a red blood cell extruding its nucleus. In the left
panel, the nucleus is partially extruded from the red blood cell and in the right
panel, the nucleus is completely extruded from the cell.
Figure 3. Mature red blood cells lack a nucleus. As they mature, erythroblasts ex‐
Next Section
trude their nucleus, making room for more hemoglobin. The two panels here show
an erythroblast before and after ejecting its nucleus, respectively. (credit: modifi‐
cation of micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical
School © 2012)
View the University of Michigan WebScope
at http://virtualslides.med.umich.edu/Histology/EMsmallCharts/3%20Image%20Scope%20fin
als/139%20-%20Erythroblast_001.svs/view.apml to explore the tissue sample in greater detail.
Inside the nucleus lies the blueprint that dictates everything a cell will do and all of the products it
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 29/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
will make. This information is stored within DNA. The nucleus sends “commandInsc”r etoa sthee F coenltl Sviizae
molecular messengers that translate the information from DNA. Each cell in your body (with the ex‐
ception of germ cells) contains the complete set of your DNA. When a cell divides, the DNA must
be duplicated so that the each new cell receives a full complement of DNA. The following section
will explore the structure of the nucleus and its contents, as well as the process of DNA replication.
Organization of the Nucleus and Its DNA
Like most other cellular organelles, the nucleus is surrounded by a membrane called the nuclear en‐
velope. This membranous covering consists of two adjacent lipid bilayers with a thin fluid space in
between them. Spanning these two bilayers are nuclear pores. A nuclear pore is a tiny passageway
for the passage of proteins, RNA, and solutes between the nucleus and the cytoplasm. Proteins
called pore complexes lining the nuclear pores regulate the passage of materials into and out of the
nucleus.
Inside the nuclear envelope is a gel-like nucleoplasm with solutes that include the building blocks of
nucleic acids. There also can be a dark-staining mass often visible under a simple light microscope,
called a nucleolus (plural = nucleoli). The nucleolus is a region of the nucleus that is responsible for
manufacturing the RNA necessary for construction of ribosomes. Once synthesized, newly made ri‐
bosomal subunits exit the cell’s nucleus through the nuclear pores.
Next Section
The genetic instructions that are used to build and maintain an organism are arranged in an orderly
manner in strands of DNA. Within the nucleus are threads of chromatin composed of DNA and as‐
sociated proteins (Figure 4. DNA Macrostructure). Along the chromatin threads, the DNA is
wrapped around a set of histone proteins. A nucleosome is a single, wrapped DNA-histone com‐
plex. Multiple nucleosomes along the entire molecule of DNA appear like a beaded necklace, in
which the string is the DNA and the beads are the associated histones. When a cell is in the process
of division, the chromatin condenses into chromosomes, so that the DNA can be safely transported
to the “daughter cells.” The chromosome is composed of DNA and proteins; it is the condensed
form of chromatin. It is estimated that humans have almost 22,000 genes distributed on 46
chromosomes.
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 30/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
Increase Font Size
DNA Macrostructure
This diagram shows the macrostructure of DNA. A chromosome and its compo‐
nent chromatin are shown to expand into nucleosomes with histones, which fur‐
ther unravel into a DNA helix and finally into a DNA ladder.
Figure 4. Strands of DNA are wrapped around supporting histones. These pro‐
teins are increasingly bundled and condensed into chromatin, which is packed
tightly into chromosomes when the cell is ready to divide.
DNA Replication
In order for an organism to grow, develop, and maintain its health, cells must reproduce themselves
by dividing to produce two new daughter cells, each with the full complement of DNA as found in
the original cell. Billions of new cells are produced in an adult human every day. Only very few cell
types in the body do not divide, including nerve cells, skeletal muscle fibers, and cardiac muscle
cells. The division time of different cell types varies. Epithelial cells of the skin and gastrointestinal
lining, for instance, divide very frequently to replace those that are constantly being rubbed off of
the surface by friction.
Next Section
A DNA molecule is made of two strands that “complement” each other in the sense that the mole‐
cules that compose the strands fit together and bind to each other, creating a double-stranded mole‐
cule that looks much like a long, twisted ladder. Each side rail of the DNA ladder is composed of al‐
ternating sugar and phosphate groups (Figure 5. Molecular Structure of DNA). The two sides of the
ladder are not identical, but are complementary. These two backbones are bonded to each other
across pairs of protruding bases, each bonded pair forming one “rung,” or cross member. The four
DNA bases are adenine (A), thymine (T), cytosine (C), and guanine (G). Because of their shape and
charge, the two bases that compose a pair always bond together. Adenine always binds with
thymine, and cytosine always binds with guanine. The particular sequence of bases along the DNA
molecule determines the genetic code. Therefore, if the two complementary strands of DNA were
pulled apart, you could infer the order of the bases in one strand from the bases in the other, comple‐
mentary strand. For example, if one strand has a region with the sequence AGTGCCT, then the se‐
quence of the complementary strand would be TCACGGA.
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 31/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
Increase Font Size
Molecular Structure of DNA
This figure shows the DNA double helix on the top left panel. The different nu‐
cleotides are color-coded. In the top right panel, the interaction between the nu‐
cleotides through the hydrogen bonds and the location of the sugar-phosphate
backbone is shown. In the bottom panel, the structure of a nucleotide is described
in detail.
Figure 5. The DNA double helix is composed of two complementary strands. The
strands are bonded together via their nitrogenous base pairs using hydrogen
bonds.
DNA replication is the copying of DNA that occurs before cell division can take place. After a great
deal of debate and experimentation, the general method of DNA replication was deduced in 1958 by
two scientists in California, Matthew Meselson and Franklin Stahl. This method is illustrated
in Figure 6. (DNA Replication) and described below.
DNA Replication
Figure 6. DNA replication faithfully duplicates the entire genome of the cell.
Next Section
During DNA replication, a number of different enzymes work together to pull
apart the two strands so each strand can be used as a template to synthesize new
complementary strands. The two new daughter DNA molecules each contain one
pre-existing strand and one newly synthesized strand. Thus, DNA replication is
said to be “semiconservative.”
Stage 1: Initiation. The two complementary strands are separated, much like unzipping
a zipper. Special enzymes, including helicase, untwist and separate the two strands of
DNA.
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 32/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
Stage 2: Elongation. Each strand becomes a template along which a new cIonmcrpelaesme eFno‐nt Size
tary strand is built. DNA polymerase brings in the correct bases to complement the tem‐
plate strand, synthesizing a new strand base by base. A DNA polymerase is an enzyme
that adds free nucleotides to the end of a chain of DNA, making a new double strand.
This growing strand continues to be built until it has fully complemented the template
strand.
Stage 3: Termination. Once the two original strands are bound to their own, finished,
complementary strands, DNA replication is stopped and the two new identical DNA
molecules are complete.
Each new DNA molecule contains one strand from the original molecule and one newly synthesized
strand. The term for this mode of replication is “semiconservative,” because half of the original
DNA molecule is conserved in each new DNA molecule. This process continues until the cell’s
entire genome, the entire complement of an organism’s DNA, is replicated. As you might imagine,
it is very important that DNA replication take place precisely so that new cells in the body contain
the exact same genetic material as their parent cells. Mistakes made during DNA replication, such as
the accidental addition of an inappropriate nucleotide, have the potential to render a gene dysfunc‐
tional or useless. Fortunately, there are mechanisms in place to minimize such mistakes. A DNA
proofreading process enlists the help of special enzymes that scan the newly synthesized molecule
Next Section
for mistakes and corrects them. Once the process of DNA replication is complete, the cell is ready to
divide. You will explore the process of cell division later in the chapter.
Watch this video to learn about DNA replication. DNA replication proceeds simultaneously at
several sites on the same molecule. What separates the base pair at the start of DNA
replication?
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 33/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
Increase Font Size
Chapter Review
The nucleus is the command center of the cell, containing the genetic instructions for all of the ma‐
terials a cell will make (and thus all of its functions it can perform). The nucleus is encased within a
membrane of two interconnected lipid bilayers, side-by-side. This nuclear envelope is studded with
protein-lined pores that allow materials to be trafficked into and out of the nucleus. The nucleus
contains one or more nucleoli, which serve as sites for ribosome synthesis. The nucleus houses the
genetic material of the cell: DNA. DNA is normally found as a loosely contained structure called
chromatin within the nucleus, where it is wound up and associated with a variety of histone proteins.
When a cell is about to divide, the chromatin coils tightly and condenses to form chromosomes.
There is a pool of cells constantly dividing within your body. The result is billions of new cells be‐
ing created each day. Before any cell is ready to divide, it must replicate its DNA so that each new
daughter cell will receive an exact copy of the organism’s genome. A variety of enzymes are enlisted
during DNA replication. These enzymes unwind the DNA molecule, separate the two strands, and
assist with the building of complementary strands along each parent strand. The original DNA
strands serve as templates from which the nucleotide sequence of the new strands are determined
and synthesized. When replication is completed, two identical DNA molecules exist. Each one con‐
tains one original strand and one newly synthesized complementary strand.
Next Section
Protein Synthesis
By the end of this section you will be able to:
Explain how the genetic code stored within DNA determines the protein that will form
Describe the process of transcription
Describe the process of translation
Discuss the function of ribosomes
It was mentioned earlier that DNA provides a “blueprint” for the cell structure and physiology. This
refers to the fact that DNA contains the information necessary for the cell to build one very impor‐
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 34/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
tant type of molecule: the protein. Most structural components of the cell are maIdnec ruepa,s aet Floeanstt S inize
part, by proteins and virtually all the functions that a cell carries out are completed with the help of
proteins. One of the most important classes of proteins is enzymes, which help speed up necessary
biochemical reactions that take place inside the cell. Some of these critical biochemical reactions in‐
clude building larger molecules from smaller components (such as occurs during DNA replication or
synthesis of microtubules) and breaking down larger molecules into smaller components (such as
when harvesting chemical energy from nutrient molecules). Whatever the cellular process may be, it
is almost sure to involve proteins. Just as the cell’s genome describes its full complement of DNA, a
cell’s proteome is its full complement of proteins. Protein synthesis begins with genes. A gene is a
functional segment of DNA that provides the genetic information necessary to build a protein. Each
particular gene provides the code necessary to construct a particular protein. Gene expression,
which transforms the information coded in a gene to a final gene product, ultimately dictates the
structure and function of a cell by determining which proteins are made.
The interpretation of genes works in the following way. Recall that proteins are polymers, or chains,
of many amino acid building blocks. The sequence of bases in a gene (that is, its sequence of A, T,
C, G nucleotides) translates to an amino acid sequence. A triplet is a section of three DNA bases in
a row that codes for a specific amino acid. Similar to the way in which the three-letter code d-o-
g signals the image of a dog, the three-letter DNA base code signals the use of a particular amino
acid. For example, the DNA triplet CAC (cytosine, adenine, and cytosine) specifies the amino acid
valine. Therefore, a gene, which is composed of multiple triplets in a unique sequence, provides the
code to build an entire protein, with multiple amino acids in the proper sequence (Figure 1. The
Next Section
Genetic Code). The mechanism by which cells turn the DNA code into a protein product is a two-
step process, with an RNA molecule as the intermediate.
The Genetic Code
This diagram shows the translation of RNA into proteins. A DNA template
strand is shown to become an RNA strand through transcription. Then the RNA
strand undergoes translation and becomes proteins.
Figure 1. DNA holds all of the genetic information necessary to build a cell’s pro‐
teins. The nucleotide sequence of a gene is ultimately translated into an amino
acid sequence of the gene’s corresponding protein.
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 35/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
Increase Font Size
From DNA to RNA: Transcription
DNA is housed within the nucleus, and protein synthesis takes place in the cytoplasm, thus there
must be some sort of intermediate messenger that leaves the nucleus and manages protein synthesis.
This intermediate messenger is messenger RNA (mRNA), a single-stranded nucleic acid that car‐
ries a copy of the genetic code for a single gene out of the nucleus and into the cytoplasm where it is
used to produce proteins.
There are several different types of RNA, each having different functions in the cell. The structure
of RNA is similar to DNA with a few small exceptions. For one thing, unlike DNA, most types of
RNA, including mRNA, are single-stranded and contain no complementary strand. Second, the ri‐
bose sugar in RNA contains an additional oxygen atom compared with DNA. Finally, instead of the
base thymine, RNA contains the base uracil. This means that adenine will always pair up with uracil
during the protein synthesis process.
Gene expression begins with the process called transcription, which is the synthesis of a strand of
mRNA that is complementary to the gene of interest. This process is called transcription because the
mRNA is like a transcript, or copy, of the gene’s DNA code. Transcription begins in a fashion some‐
what like DNA replication, in that a region of DNA unwinds and the two strands separate, however,
only that small portion of the DNA will be split apart. The triplets within the gene on this section of
the DNA molecule are used as the template to transcribe the complementary strand of RNA (Figure
Next Section
2. Transcription: from DNA to mRNA). A codon is a three-base sequence of mRNA, so-called be‐
cause they directly encode amino acids. Like DNA replication, there are three stages to transcrip‐
tion: initiation, elongation, and termination.
Transcription: from DNA to mRNA
In this diagram, RNA polymerase is shown transcribing a DNA template strand
into its corresponding RNA transcript.
Figure 2. In the first of the two stages of making protein from DNA, a gene on the
DNA molecule is transcribed into a complementary mRNA molecule.
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 36/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
Increase Font Size
Stage 1: Initiation. A region at the beginning of the gene called a promoter—a particu‐
lar sequence of nucleotides—triggers the start of transcription.
Stage 2: Elongation. Transcription starts when RNA polymerase unwinds the DNA seg‐
ment. One strand, referred to as the coding strand, becomes the template with the genes
to be coded. The polymerase then aligns the correct nucleic acid (A, C, G, or U) with its
complementary base on the coding strand of DNA. RNA polymerase is an enzyme that
adds new nucleotides to a growing strand of RNA. This process builds a strand of
mRNA.
Stage 3: Termination. When the polymerase has reached the end of the gene, one of
three specific triplets (UAA, UAG, or UGA) codes a “stop” signal, which triggers the
enzymes to terminate transcription and release the mRNA transcript.
Before the mRNA molecule leaves the nucleus and proceeds to protein synthesis, it is modified in a
number of ways. For this reason, it is often called a pre-mRNA at this stage. For example, your
DNA, and thus complementary mRNA, contains long regions called non-coding regions that do not
code for amino acids. Their function is still a mystery, but the process called splicing rNeemxot Sveecst itohnese
non-coding regions from the pre-mRNA transcript (Figure 3. Splicing DNA). A spliceosome—a
structure composed of various proteins and other molecules—attaches to the mRNA and “splices”
or cuts out the non-coding regions. The removed segment of the transcript is called an intron. The
remaining exons are pasted together. An exon is a segment of RNA that remains after splicing.
Interestingly, some introns that are removed from mRNA are not always non-coding. When different
coding regions of mRNA are spliced out, different variations of the protein will eventually result,
with differences in structure and function. This process results in a much larger variety of possible
proteins and protein functions. When the mRNA transcript is ready, it travels out of the nucleus and
into the cytoplasm.
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 37/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
Increase Font Size
Splicing DNA
In this diagram, a pre-mRNA transcript is shown in the top of a flowchart. This
pre-mRNA transcript contains introns and exons. In the next step, the intron is in a
structure called the spliceosome. In the last step, the intron is shown separated
from the spliced RNA.
Figure 3. In the nucleus, a structure called a spliceosome cuts out introns (non‐
coding regions) within a pre-mRNA transcript and reconnects the exons.
From RNA to Protein: Translation
Like translating a book from one language into another, the codons on a strand of mRNA must be
translated into the amino acid alphabet of proteins. Translation is the process of synthesizing a
chain of amino acids called a polypeptide. Translation requires two major aids: first, a “translator,”
the molecule that will conduct the translation, and second, a substrate on which the mRNA strand is
translated into a new protein, like the translator’s “desk.” Both of these requirements are fulfilled by
other types of RNA. The substrate on which translation takes place is the ribosome.
Remember that many of a cell’s ribosomes are found associated with the rough ER, and carry out
Next Section
the synthesis of proteins destined for the Golgi apparatus. Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) is a type of
RNA that, together with proteins, composes the structure of the ribosome. Ribosomes exist in the
cytoplasm as two distinct components, a small and a large subunit. When an mRNA molecule is
ready to be translated, the two subunits come together and attach to the mRNA. The ribosome pro‐
vides a substrate for translation, bringing together and aligning the mRNA molecule with the molec‐
ular “translators” that must decipher its code.
The other major requirement for protein synthesis is the translator molecules that physically “read”
the mRNA codons. Transfer RNA (tRNA) is a type of RNA that ferries the appropriate correspond‐
ing amino acids to the ribosome, and attaches each new amino acid to the last, building the polypep‐
tide chain one-by-one. Thus tRNA transfers specific amino acids from the cytoplasm to a growing
polypeptide. The tRNA molecules must be able to recognize the codons on mRNA and match them
with the correct amino acid. The tRNA is modified for this function. On one end of its structure is a
binding site for a specific amino acid. On the other end is a base sequence that matches the codon
specifying its particular amino acid. This sequence of three bases on the tRNA molecule is called
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 38/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
an anticodon. For example, a tRNA responsible for shuttling the amino acid glyIcnicnree acosne tFaoinnst aSize
binding site for glycine on one end. On the other end it contains an anticodon that complements the
glycine codon (GGA is a codon for glycine, and so the tRNAs anticodon would read CCU).
Equipped with its particular cargo and matching anticodon, a tRNA molecule can read its recog‐
nized mRNA codon and bring the corresponding amino acid to the growing chain (Figure 4.
Translation from RNA to Protein).
Translation from RNA to Protein
The top part of this figure shows a large ribosomal subunit coming into contact
with the mRNA that already has the small ribosomal subunit attached. A tRNA
and an anticodon are in proximity. In the second panel, the tRNA also binds to the
same site as the ribosomal subunits. In the bottom panel, a polypeptide chain is
shown emerging from the complex.
Figure 4. During translation, the mRNA transcript is “read” by a functional com‐
plex consisting of the ribosome and tRNA molecules. tRNAs bring the appropriate
amino acids in sequence to the growing polypeptide chain by matching their anti-
codons with codons on the mRNA strand.
Much like the processes of DNA replication and transcription, translation consists of thNreexet Smeacitnion
stages: initiation, elongation, and termination. Initiation takes place with the binding of a ribosome
to an mRNA transcript. The elongation stage involves the recognition of a tRNA anticodon with the
next mRNA codon in the sequence. Once the anticodon and codon sequences are bound (remember,
they are complementary base pairs), the tRNA presents its amino acid cargo and the growing
polypeptide strand is attached to this next amino acid. This attachment takes place with the assist‐
ance of various enzymes and requires energy. The tRNA molecule then releases the mRNA strand,
the mRNA strand shifts one codon over in the ribosome, and the next appropriate tRNA arrives with
its matching anticodon. This process continues until the final codon on the mRNA is reached which
provides a “stop” message that signals termination of translation and triggers the release of the com‐
plete, newly synthesized protein. Thus, a gene within the DNA molecule is transcribed into mRNA,
which is then translated into a protein product (Figure 5. From DNA to Protein: Transcription
through Translation).
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 39/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
Increase Font Size
From DNA to Protein: Transcription through Translation
This figure shows a schematic of a cell where transcription from DNA to
mRNA takes place inside the nucleus and translation from mRNA to protein takes
place in the cytoplasm.
Figure 5. Transcription within the cell nucleus produces an mRNA molecule,
which is modified and then sent into the cytoplasm for translation. The transcript
is decoded into a protein with the help of a ribosome and tRNA molecules.
Commonly, an mRNA transcription will be translated simultaneously by several adjacent ribosomes.
This increases the efficiency of protein synthesis. A single ribosome might translate an mRNA mol‐
ecule in approximately one minute; so multiple ribosomes aboard a single transcript could produce
multiple times the number of the same protein in the same minute. A polyribosome is a string of ri‐
bosomes translating a single mRNA strand.
Watch this video to learn about ribosomes. The ribosome binds to the mRNA molecule to start
translation of its code into a protein. What happens to the small and large ribosomal subunits at
the end of translation?
Next Section
Chapter Review
DNA stores the information necessary for instructing the cell to perform all of its functions. Cells
use the genetic code stored within DNA to build proteins, which ultimately determine the structure
and function of the cell. This genetic code lies in the particular sequence of nucleotides that make up
each gene along the DNA molecule. To “read” this code, the cell must perform two sequential steps.
In the first step, transcription, the DNA code is converted into a RNA code. A molecule of messen‐
ger RNA that is complementary to a specific gene is synthesized in a process similar to DNA repli‐
cation. The molecule of mRNA provides the code to synthesize a protein. In the process of transla‐
tion, the mRNA attaches to a ribosome. Next, tRNA molecules shuttle the appropriate amino acids
to the ribosome, one-by-one, coded by sequential triplet codons on the mRNA, until the protein is
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 40/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
fully synthesized. When completed, the mRNA detaches from the ribosome, andI nthcere parsoet eFionn its Sriez‐e
leased. Typically, multiple ribosomes attach to a single mRNA molecule at once such that multiple
proteins can be manufactured from the mRNA concurrently.
Cell Growth and Division
By the end of this section you will be able to:
Describe the stages of the cell cycle
Discuss how the cell cycle is regulated
Describe the implications of losing control over the cell cycle
Describe the stages of mitosis and cytokinesis, in order
So far in this chapter, you have read numerous times of the importance and prevalence of cell divi‐
sion. While there are a few cells in the body that do not undergo cell division (such as gametes, red
blood cells, most neurons, and some muscle cells), most somatic cells divide regularly. A somatic
cell is a general term for a body cell, and all human cells, except for the cells that produce eggs and
sperm (which are referred to as germ cells), are somatic cells. Somatic cells contain two copies of
Next Section
each of their chromosomes (one copy received from each parent). A homologous pair of chromo‐
somes is the two copies of a single chromosome found in each somatic cell. The human is
a diploid organism, having 23 homologous pairs of chromosomes in each of the somatic cells. The
condition of having pairs of chromosomes is known as diploidy.
Cells in the body replace themselves over the lifetime of a person. For example, the cells lining the
gastrointestinal tract must be frequently replaced when constantly “worn off” by the movement of
food through the gut. But what triggers a cell to divide, and how does it prepare for and complete
cell division? The cell cycle is the sequence of events in the life of the cell from the moment it is
created at the end of a previous cycle of cell division until it then divides itself, generating two new
cells.
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 41/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
Increase Font Size
The Cell Cycle
One “turn” or cycle of the cell cycle consists of two general phases: interphase, followed by mitosis
and cytokinesis. Interphase is the period of the cell cycle during which the cell is not dividing. The
majority of cells are in interphase most of the time. Mitosis is the division of genetic material, dur‐
ing which the cell nucleus breaks down and two new, fully functional, nuclei are
formed. Cytokinesis divides the cytoplasm into two distinctive cells.
Interphase
A cell grows and carries out all normal metabolic functions and processes in a period called
G (Figure 1. Cell Cycle). G phase (gap 1 phase) is the first gap, or growth phase in the cell cycle.
1 1
For cells that will divide again, G is followed by replication of the DNA, during the S phase. The S
1
phase (synthesis phase) is period during which a cell replicates its DNA.
Cell Cycle
This figure shows the different stages of the cell cycle. The G0 phase where the
cells are not actively dividing is also labeled. Next Section
Figure 1. The two major phases of the cell cycle include mitosis (cell division),
and interphase, when the cell grows and performs all of its normal functions.
Interphase is further subdivided into G , S, and G phases.
1 2
After the synthesis phase, the cell proceeds through the G phase. The G phase is a second gap
2 2
phase, during which the cell continues to grow and makes the necessary preparations for mitosis.
Between G , S, and G phases, cells will vary the most in their duration of the G1 phase. It is here
1 2
that a cell might spend a couple of hours, or many days. The S phase typically lasts between 8-10
hours and the G phase approximately 5 hours. In contrast to these phases, the G phase is a resting
2 0
phase of the cell cycle. Cells that have temporarily stopped dividing and are resting (a common con‐
dition) and cells that have permanently ceased dividing (like nerve cells) are said to be in G .
0
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 42/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
Increase Font Size
The Structure of Chromosomes
Billions of cells in the human body divide every day. During the synthesis phase (S, for DNA syn‐
thesis) of interphase, the amount of DNA within the cell precisely doubles. Therefore, after DNA
replication but before cell division, each cell actually contains two copies of each chromosome.
Each copy of the chromosome is referred to as a sister chromatid and is physically bound to the
other copy. The centromere is the structure that attaches one sister chromatid to another. Because a
human cell has 46 chromosomes, during this phase, there are 92 chromatids (46 × 2) in the cell.
Make sure not to confuse the concept of a pair of chromatids (one chromosome and its exact copy
attached during mitosis) and a homologous pair of chromosomes (two paired chromosomes which
were inherited separately, one from each parent) (Figure 2. A Homologous Pair of Chromosomes
with their Attached Sister Chromatids).
A Homologous Pair of Chromosomes with their Attached Sister Chromatids
This image shows a pair of chromosomes. The major parts such as the homolo‐
gous chromosomes, kinetochore and the sister chromatids are labeled.
Figure 2. The red and blue colors correspond to a homologous pair of chromo‐
somes. Each member of the pair was separately inherited from one parent. Each
chromosome in the homologous pair is also bound to an identical sister chro‐
Next Section
matid, which is produced by DNA replication, and results in the familiar “X”
shape.
Mitosis and Cytokinesis
The mitotic phase of the cell typically takes between 1 and 2 hours. During this phase, a cell under‐
goes two major processes. First, it completes mitosis, during which the contents of the nucleus are
equitably pulled apart and distributed between its two halves. Cytokinesis then occurs, dividing the
cytoplasm and cell body into two new cells. Mitosis is divided into four major stages that take place
after interphase (Figure 3. Cell Division: Mitosis Followed by Cytokinesis) and in the following or‐
der: prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase. The process is then followed by cytokinesis.
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 43/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
Increase Font Size
Cell Division: Mitosis Followed by Cytokinesis
Figure 3. The stages of cell division oversee the separation of identical genetic
material into two new nuclei, followed by the division of the cytoplasm.
Prophase is the first phase of mitosis, during which the loosely packed chromatin coils and con‐
denses into visible chromosomes. During prophase, each chromosome becomes visible with its
identical partner attached, forming the familiar X-shape of sister chromatids. The nucleolus disap‐
pears early during this phase, and the nuclear envelope also disintegrates.
A major occurrence during prophase concerns a very important structure that contains the origin site
for microtubule growth. Recall the cellular structures called centrioles that serve as origin points
from which microtubules extend. These tiny structures also play a very important role during mito‐
sis. A centrosome is a pair of centrioles together. The cell contains two centrosomes side-by-side,
which begin to move apart during prophase. As the centrosomes migrate to two different sides of the
cell, microtubules begin to extend from each like long fingers from two hands extending toward
each other. The mitotic spindle is the structure composed of the centrosomes and their emerging
microtubules.
Near the end of prophase there is an invasion of the nuclear area by microtubules from the mitotic
spindle. The nuclear membrane has disintegrated, and the microtubules attach themselves to the cen‐
Next Section
tromeres that adjoin pairs of sister chromatids. The kinetochore is a protein structure on the cen‐
tromere that is the point of attachment between the mitotic spindle and the sister chromatids. This
stage is referred to as late prophase or “prometaphase” to indicate the transition between prophase
and metaphase.
Metaphase is the second stage of mitosis. During this stage, the sister chromatids, with their at‐
tached microtubules, line up along a linear plane in the middle of the cell. A metaphase plate forms
between the centrosomes that are now located at either end of the cell. The metaphase plate is the
name for the plane through the center of the spindle on which the sister chromatids are positioned.
The microtubules are now poised to pull apart the sister chromatids and bring one from each pair to
each side of the cell.
Anaphase is the third stage of mitosis. Anaphase takes place over a few minutes, when the pairs of
sister chromatids are separated from one another, forming individual chromosomes once again.
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 44/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
These chromosomes are pulled to opposite ends of the cell by their kinetochoresI,n acsr ethaes em Fiocnrot ‐Size
tubules shorten. Each end of the cell receives one partner from each pair of sister chromatids, ensur‐
ing that the two new daughter cells will contain identical genetic material.
Telophase is the final stage of mitosis. Telophase is characterized by the formation of two new
daughter nuclei at either end of the dividing cell. These newly formed nuclei surround the genetic
material, which uncoils such that the chromosomes return to loosely packed chromatin. Nucleoli
also reappear within the new nuclei, and the mitotic spindle breaks apart, each new cell receiving its
own complement of DNA, organelles, membranes, and centrioles. At this point, the cell is already
beginning to split in half as cytokinesis begins.
The cleavage furrow is a contractile band made up of microfilaments that forms around the midline
of the cell during cytokinesis. (Recall that microfilaments consist of actin.) This contractile band
squeezes the two cells apart until they finally separate. Two new cells are now formed. One of these
cells (the “stem cell”) enters its own cell cycle; able to grow and divide again at some future time.
The other cell transforms into the functional cell of the tissue, typically replacing an “old” cell there.
Imagine a cell that completed mitosis but never underwent cytokinesis. In some cases, a cell may di‐
vide its genetic material and grow in size, but fail to undergo cytokinesis. This results in larger cells
with more than one nucleus. Usually this is an unwanted aberration and can be a sign of cancerous
cells.
Next Section
Cell Cycle Control
A very elaborate and precise system of regulation controls direct the way cells proceed from one
phase to the next in the cell cycle and begin mitosis. The control system involves molecules within
the cell as well as external triggers. These internal and external control triggers provide “stop” and
“advance” signals for the cell. Precise regulation of the cell cycle is critical for maintaining the
health of an organism, and loss of cell cycle control can lead to cancer.
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 45/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
Increase Font Size
Mechanisms of Cell Cycle Control
As the cell proceeds through its cycle, each phase involves certain processes that must be completed
before the cell should advance to the next phase. A checkpoint is a point in the cell cycle at which
the cycle can be signaled to move forward or stopped. At each of these checkpoints, different vari‐
eties of molecules provide the stop or go signals, depending on certain conditions within the cell.
A cyclin is one of the primary classes of cell cycle control molecules (Figure 4. Control of the Cell
Cycle). A cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) is one of a group of molecules that work together with
cyclins to determine progression past cell checkpoints. By interacting with many additional mole‐
cules, these triggers push the cell cycle forward unless prevented from doing so by “stop” signals, if
for some reason the cell is not ready. At the G checkpoint, the cell must be ready for DNA synthesis
1
to occur. At the G checkpoint the cell must be fully prepared for mitosis. Even during mitosis, a cru‐
2
cial stop and go checkpoint in metaphase ensures that the cell is fully prepared to complete cell divi‐
sion. The metaphase checkpoint ensures that all sister chromatids are properly attached to their re‐
spective microtubules and lined up at the metaphase plate before the signal is given to separate them
during anaphase.
Control of the Cell Cycle
This image shows the different stages of the cell cycle along with the check‐
points between them and the cyclins responsible for the checkpoint at each stage.
Next Section
Figure 4. Cells proceed through the cell cycle under the control of a variety of
molecules, such as cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases. These control molecules
determine whether or not the cell is prepared to move into the following stage.
The Cell Cycle Out of Control: Implications
Most people understand that cancer or tumors are caused by abnormal cells that multiply continu‐
ously. If the abnormal cells continue to divide unstopped, they can damage the tissues around them,
spread to other parts of the body, and eventually result in death. In healthy cells, the tight regulation
mechanisms of the cell cycle prevent this from happening, while failures of cell cycle control can
cause unwanted and excessive cell division. Failures of control may be caused by inherited genetic
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 46/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
abnormalities that compromise the function of certain “stop” and “go” signals. EInnvcrireoansme Feonntatl Sinizseult
that damages DNA can also cause dysfunction in those signals. Often, a combination of both genetic
predisposition and environmental factors lead to cancer.
The process of a cell escaping its normal control system and becoming cancerous may actually hap‐
pen throughout the body quite frequently. Fortunately, certain cells of the immune system are capa‐
ble of recognizing cells that have become cancerous and destroying them. However, in certain cases
the cancerous cells remain undetected and continue to proliferate. If the resulting tumor does not
pose a threat to surrounding tissues, it is said to be benign and can usually be easily removed. If ca‐
pable of damage, the tumor is considered malignant and the patient is diagnosed with cancer.
HOMEOSTATIC IMBALANCES
Cancer Arises from Homeostatic Imbalances
Cancer is an extremely complex condition, capable of arising from a wide variety of ge‐
netic and environmental causes. Typically, mutations or aberrations in a cell’s DNA that
compromise normal cell cycle control systems lead to cancerous tumors. Cell cycle con‐
trol is an example of a homeostatic mechanism that maintains proper cell function and
health. While progressing through the phases of the cell cycle, a large variety of intra‐
cellular molecules provide stop and go signals to regulate movement forward to the next
phase. These signals are maintained in an intricate balance so that the cell only proceeds
Next Section
to the next phase when it is ready. This homeostatic control of the cell cycle can be
thought of like a car’s cruise control. Cruise control will continually apply just the right
amount of acceleration to maintain a desired speed, unless the driver hits the brakes, in
which case the car will slow down. Similarly, the cell includes molecular messengers,
such as cyclins, that push the cell forward in its cycle.
In addition to cyclins, a class of proteins that are encoded by genes called proto-onco‐
genes provide important signals that regulate the cell cycle and move it forward.
Examples of proto-oncogene products include cell-surface receptors for growth factors,
or cell-signaling molecules, two classes of molecules that can promote DNA replication
and cell division. In contrast, a second class of genes known as tumor suppressor genes
sends stop signals during a cell cycle. For example, certain protein products of tumor
suppressor genes signal potential problems with the DNA and thus stop the cell from di‐
viding, while other proteins signal the cell to die if it is damaged beyond repair. Some
tumor suppressor proteins also signal a sufficient surrounding cellular density, which in‐
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 47/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
dicates that the cell need not presently divide. The latter function is uniqueIlnyc rimeapsoer tFaonntt Size
in preventing tumor growth: normal cells exhibit a phenomenon called “contact inhibi‐
tion;” thus, extensive cellular contact with neighboring cells causes a signal that stops
further cell division.
These two contrasting classes of genes, proto-oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes,
are like the accelerator and brake pedal of the cell’s own “cruise control system,” re‐
spectively. Under normal conditions, these stop and go signals are maintained in a ho‐
meostatic balance. Generally speaking, there are two ways that the cell’s cruise control
can lose control: a malfunctioning (overactive) accelerator, or a malfunctioning (under‐
active) brake. When compromised through a mutation, or otherwise altered, proto-onco‐
genes can be converted to oncogenes, which produce oncoproteins that push a cell for‐
ward in its cycle and stimulate cell division even when it is undesirable to do so. For ex‐
ample, a cell that should be programmed to self-destruct (a process called apoptosis) due
to extensive DNA damage might instead be triggered to proliferate by an oncoprotein.
On the other hand, a dysfunctional tumor suppressor gene may fail to provide the cell
with a necessary stop signal, also resulting in unwanted cell division and proliferation.
A delicate homeostatic balance between the many proto-oncogenes and tumor suppres‐
sor genes delicately controls the cell cycle and ensures that only healthy cells replicate.
Therefore, a disruption of this homeostatic balance can cause aberrant cell division and
cancerous growths.
Next Section
Visit this link to learn about mitosis. Mitosis results in two identical diploid cells. What struc‐
tures forms during prophase?
Chapter Review
The life of cell consists of stages that make up the cell cycle. After a cell is born, it passes through
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 48/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
an interphase before it is ready to replicate itself and produce daughter cells. ThiIsn icnrteearspeh aFsoen tin S‐ize
cludes two gap phases (G and G ), as well as an S phase, during which its DNA is replicated in
1 2
preparation for cell division. The cell cycle is under precise regulation by chemical messengers both
inside and outside the cell that provide “stop” and “go” signals for movement from one phase to the
next. Failures of these signals can result in cells that continue to divide uncontrollably, which can
lead to cancer.
Once a cell has completed interphase and is ready for cell division, it proceeds through four separate
stages of mitosis (prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase). Telophase is followed by the divi‐
sion of the cytoplasm (cytokinesis), which generates two daughter cells. This process takes place in
all normally dividing cells of the body except for the germ cells that produce eggs and sperm.
Cellular Differentiation
By the end of this section you will be able to:
Discuss how the generalized cells of a developing embryo or the stem cells of an adult organism
become differentiated into specialized cells
Distinguish between the categories of stem cells
Next Section
How does a complex organism such as a human develop from a single cell—a fertilized egg—into
the vast array of cell types such as nerve cells, muscle cells, and epithelial cells that characterize the
adult? Throughout development and adulthood, the process of cellular differentiation leads cells to
assume their final morphology and physiology. Differentiation is the process by which unspecialized
cells become specialized to carry out distinct functions.
Stem Cells
A stem cell is an unspecialized cell that can divide without limit as needed and can, under specific
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 49/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
conditions, differentiate into specialized cells. Stem cells are divided into severaIln ccarteeagsoer iFeosn atc Sciozred‐
ing to their potential to differentiate.
The first embryonic cells that arise from the division of the zygote are the ultimate stem cells; these
stems cells are described as totipotent because they have the potential to differentiate into any of
the cells needed to enable an organism to grow and develop.
The embryonic cells that develop from totipotent stem cells and are precursors to the fundamental
tissue layers of the embryo are classified as pluripotent. A pluripotent stem cell is one that has the
potential to differentiate into any type of human tissue but cannot support the full development of an
organism. These cells then become slightly more specialized, and are referred to as multipotent
cells.
A multipotent stem cell has the potential to differentiate into different types of cells within a given
cell lineage or small number of lineages, such as a red blood cell or white blood cell.
Finally, multipotent cells can become further specialized oligopotent cells. An oligopotent stem cell
is limited to becoming one of a few different cell types. In contrast, a unipotent cell is fully special‐
ized and can only reproduce to generate more of its own specific cell type.
Stem cells are unique in that they can also continually divide and regenerate new stem cells instead
of further specializing. There are different stem cells present at different stages of a human’s life.
They include the embryonic stem cells of the embryo, fetal stem cells of the fetus, andN aedxut lSt esctteiomn
cells in the adult. One type of adult stem cell is the epithelial stem cell, which gives rise to the ker‐
atinocytes in the multiple layers of epithelial cells in the epidermis of skin. Adult bone marrow has
three distinct types of stem cells: hematopoietic stem cells, which give rise to red blood cells, white
blood cells, and platelets (Figure 1. Hematopoiesis); endothelial stem cells, which give rise to the
endothelial cell types that line blood and lymph vessels; and mesenchymal stem cells, which give
rise to the different types of muscle cells.
Hematopoiesis
This flowchart shows the differentiation of a hemocytoblast, a stem cell, into
the different types of cells found in blood.
Figure 1. The process of hematopoiesis involves the differentiation of multipotent
cells into blood and immune cells. The multipotent hematopoietic stem cells give
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 50/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
Increase Font Size
rise to many different cell types, including the cells of the immune system and red
blood cells.
Differentiation
When a cell differentiates (becomes more specialized), it may undertake major changes in its size,
shape, metabolic activity, and overall function. Because all cells in the body, beginning with the fer‐
tilized egg, contain the same DNA, how do the different cell types come to be so different? The an‐
swer is analogous to a movie script. The different actors in a movie all read from the same script,
however, they are each only reading their own part of the script. Similarly, all cells contain the same
full complement of DNA, but each type of cell only “reads” the portions of DNA that are relevant to
its own function. In biology, this is referred to as the unique genetic expression of each cell.
In order for a cell to differentiate into its specialized form and function, it need only manipulate
those genes (and thus those proteins) that will be expressed, and not those that will remain silent.
The primary mechanism by which genes are turned “on” or “off” is through transcription factors.
A transcription factor is one of a class of proteins that bind to specific genes on the DNA molecule
and either promote or inhibit their transcription (Figure 2. Transcription Factors Regulate Gene
Expression).
Next Section
Transcription Factors Regulate Gene Expression
This diagram shows transcription factors and then RNA polymerase binding to
a stretch of RNA to initiate transcription.
Figure 2. While each body cell contains the organism’s entire genome, different
cells regulate gene expression with the use of various transcription factors.
Transcription factors are proteins that affect the binding of RNA polymerase to a
particular gene on the DNA molecule.
EVERYDAY CONNECTION
Stem Cell Research
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 51/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
Stem cell research aims to find ways to use stem cells to regenerate and reIpnacirre caeslelu Flaornt Size
damage. Over time, most adult cells undergo the wear and tear of aging and lose their
ability to divide and repair themselves. Stem cells do not display a particular morphol‐
ogy or function. Adult stem cells, which exist as a small subset of cells in most tissues,
keep dividing and can differentiate into a number of specialized cells generally formed
by that tissue. These cells enable the body to renew and repair body tissues.
The mechanisms that induce a non-differentiated cell to become a specialized cell are
poorly understood. In a laboratory setting, it is possible to induce stem cells to differen‐
tiate into specialized cells by changing the physical and chemical conditions of growth.
Several sources of stem cells are used experimentally and are classified according to
their origin and potential for differentiation. Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) are
extracted from embryos and are pluripotent. The adult stem cells that are present in
many organs and differentiated tissues, such as bone marrow and skin, are multipotent,
being limited in differentiation to the types of cells found in those tissues. The stem cells
isolated from umbilical cord blood are also multipotent, as are cells from deciduous
teeth (baby teeth). Researchers have recently developed induced pluripotent stem cells
(iPSCs) from mouse and human adult stem cells. These cells are genetically repro‐
grammed multipotent adult cells that function like embryonic stem cells; they are capa‐
ble of generating cells characteristic of all three germ layers.
Because of their capacity to divide and differentiate into specialized cells, stem cells of‐
fer a potential treatment for diseases such as diabetes and heart disease (Figure 3N. eSxtte Smection
Cells). Cell-based therapy refers to treatment in which stem cells induced to differentiate
in a growth dish are injected into a patient to repair damaged or destroyed cells or tis‐
sues. Many obstacles must be overcome for the application of cell-based therapy.
Although embryonic stem cells have a nearly unlimited range of differentiation poten‐
tial, they are seen as foreign by the patient’s immune system and may trigger rejection.
Also, the destruction of embryos to isolate embryonic stem cells raises considerable eth‐
ical and legal questions.
Stem Cells
This flow chart shows the differentiation of stem cells into different cell types.
The top layer shows a totipotent stem cell, which becomes a pluripotent stem
cell and then a multipotent stem cell. A multipotent stem cell can then differenti‐
ate into different cell types.
Figure 3. The capacity of stem cells to differentiate into specialized cells make
them potentially valuable in therapeutic applications designed to replace dam‐
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 52/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
aged cells of different body tissues. Increase Font Size
In contrast, adult stem cells isolated from a patient are not seen as foreign by the body,
but they have a limited range of differentiation. Some individuals bank the cord blood or
deciduous teeth of their child, storing away those sources of stem cells for future use,
should their child need it. Induced pluripotent stem cells are considered a promising ad‐
vance in the field because using them avoids the legal, ethical, and immunological pit‐
falls of embryonic stem cells.
Chapter Review
One of the major areas of research in biology is that of how cells specialize to assume their unique
structures and functions, since all cells essentially originate from a single fertilized egg. Cell differ‐
entiation is the process of cells becoming specialized as they body develops. A stem cell is an unspe‐
cialized cell that can divide without limit as needed and can, under specific conditions, differentiate
into specialized cells. Stem cells are divided into several categories according to their potential to
differentiate. While all somatic cells contain the exact same genome, different cell types only ex‐
Next Section
press some of those genes at any given time. These differences in gene expression ultimately dictate
a cell’s unique morphological and physiological characteristics. The primary mechanism that deter‐
mines which genes will be expressed and which ones will not is through the use of different tran‐
scription factor proteins, which bind to DNA and promote or hinder the transcription of different
genes. Through the action of these transcription factors, cells specialize into one of hundreds of dif‐
ferent cell types in the human body.
License
This work is produced by OpenStax-CNX and licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution
License 3.0. http://cnx.org/content/m46535/1.3/
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 53/54

1/7/25, 2:24 AM 1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization – Neuroscience: Canadian 1st Edition Open Textbook
Increase Font Size
LICENSE SHARE THIS BOOK
1.1 The Cellular Levels of Organization by
Dr William Ju is licensed under a
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License, except where
otherwise noted.
Powered by Pressbooks
Open Source | Open Textbooks | Open Book Publishing | Learn More
Next Section
neuroscience.openetext.utoronto.ca/chapter/anatomy-physiology-the-cellular-levels-of-organization/ 54/54



IBB 2022
Additional Learning Ressource:
Neuroanatomy
Charles Watson
Matthew Kirkcaldie, Friedrich Schwarz
April 2022

AN INTRODUCTION TO THEANATOMY OF THE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM1 BLOOD SUPPLY TO THE BRAIN 82
Introduction 1 The blood supply to the brain 82
DEVELOPMENT OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 4 THE CIRCULATION OF CEREBROSPINAL FLUID 85
The development of the nervous system 4 The cerebrospinal fluid and its circulation 85
THE SPINAL CORD 14 STAININGAND IMAGING 87
Spinal Cord 14 Staining and imaging - Fundamentals 87
THE BRAIN STEM 22
Brain stem 22
The brain stem cranial nerves 32
The cerebellum 36
DIENCEPHALON 40
The diencephalon 40
HYPOTHALAMUS 42
The hypothalamus 42
Telencephalon 46
The Telencephalon 46
The Broadmann areas of the cortex 51
MOTOR SYSTEMS 53
Motor systems 53
SENSORY SYSTEM 59
The somatosory system 59
The visual system 63
The auditory system 66
The vestibular system 69
Olfaction 73
Taste 77
THEAUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM 79
The autonomic nervous system (ANS) 79

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE ANATOMY OF THE CENTRAL andbalance.Thebrainstemis alsoacorridor throughwhichpathways (tracts)travelfromthe
forebraintothespinalcord,andfromthespinalcordtotheforebrain.Italsocontains centres
NERVOUS SYSTEM
thatsendpathways tokeeptheforebrainawakeandalert.
Introduction
Thebrainstemcanbedividedintotwoparts:thehindbrain(connectedtothespinalcord)and
themidbrain(connectedtotheforebrain).Eachoftheseparts gives risetoimportantexpan-
sions onthedorsalsurface.Thedorsalsurfaceofthehindbraingives risetothecerebellum,
This introductionis avery brief summaryof theparts ofthecentralnervous systemandtheir andthedorsalsurfaceofthemidbraingives risetotwopairs ofbumps –thesuperiorandinfe-
functions.Youmayfindithelpfultohavethis basicinformationbeforeyoubeginadetailed rior colliculi.Thesuperiorcolliculiarevisualcentres,andtheinferior colliculiareauditory
studyoftheparts ofthebrain. centres.
Thecentralnervous systemconsists ofthebrainandthespinalcord.Thespinalcordis rela-
Thecerebellum
tivelysimpleinstructure,butthebrainis veryelaborate.Themainparts ofthebrainarethe
As wehavejustnoted,thecerebellumgrows outofthehindbrain.Itis formedfromthetop
brainstem,cerebellum,andforebrain.
endofthehindbrain,justbehindthemidbrain.Thecerebellumis tinyatbirth,butitlearns to
coordinatecomplexmovements duringthenextfiveyears andbeyond.Thecerebellumcon-
Thebrainand spinalcordareconnectedtoparts of thebodybynerves.Thesenerves areboth
tains anenormous number oftinyneurons calledgranulecells involvedinlearningcoordina-
sensoryandmotor.Thereare12pairs of nerves connectedtothebrain(thecranialnerves)and
tion.Almost80%ofalltheneurons inthebrainarefoundinthecerebellum.
32pairs ofnerves connectedtothespinalcord(thespinalnerves).
Theforebrain
Thefunctions ofthecentralnervous systemarearrangedhierarchically,withthesimplest
Theforebrainhas acentralpartthatcontinues thebrainstem,andamassiveoutgrowthon
functions (likestandingandwalking) locatedinthespinalcordandthemostsophisticated
eachsidecalledthecerebralhemisphere.
functions (likethinkingand memory)locatedintheforebrain.Inbetween,thebrainstemis
responsibleforsurvivalfunctions likebreathing,eating,vocalisation,andbalance.Theadvan-
Thalamus andhypothalamus
tageof this hierarchicalarrangementis thatcomplexfunctions arepre-packagedinthebrain
Thesmaller centralpartoftheforebrainis madeupof twomainstructures,thethalamus and
stemandspinalcord;theyactas completefunctionalmodules,readytorespondtocommands
thehypothalamus.Thethalamus receives sensorypathways relatedtotouch,taste,hearing,vi-
fromtheforebrain.
sion,andbalanceandsends this informationtothecerebralhemisphere.Thehypothalamus is
thecentrefor high-levelcontrolofthefunctions thatensurethesurvivaloftheindividualand
Thespinalcord
thespecies.Survivalof theindividualdepends oneatinganddrinkingandbeingabletode-
Inoldertimes,thespinalcordwas picturedas asimplesensoryreceivingstationwithsimple
fenditself,andsurvivalofthespecies depends onreproductionandcareofoffspring.Thehy-
connections tothemuscles andinternalorgans.Thesefacts arestillpartiallytrue,butthey
pothalamus carries outthesefunctions bycontrollingthesurvivalmodules inthebrainstem
onlytellpartofthestory.Forexample,thespinalcord actionmodules cancontrolwhole
andspinalcordandcontrollingtheendocrineandautonomicnervous systems.
movementpatterns,notjustconnections tosinglemuscles.Morethanthat,itcancoordinate
muscleactivityinvolvedin walking,standing,balance,andreachingandgrasping.There-
Thecerebralhemisphere
markablecontrolofthespinalcordcanbeseeninanimals likehorses thatareabletostand
Thecerebralhemisphereconsists ofanoutsidelayercalledthecerebralcortexandanumber
andmovearoundwithinminutes ofbeingbornbecausethesefunctions arealreadypre-pro-
ofdeepneurongroups calledthebasalganglia.Inthehumanbrain,thecerebralcortexunder-
grammedinthespinalcord.
goes massiveexpansion,whichresults indeepfoldingthatforms sulciandgyrionthesur-
face.Thecerebralcortexis subdividedintoabout180distinctareas,butweonlyknow the
Thewiringofthespinalcordenables ittorespondto somesensorysignals inarapidreflex
precisefunctions ofsomeof theseareas.However,wedoknow alotaboutthetotalfunctions
waybeforethebrainis evenawareof thesensorysignal.Aprimeexampleis whenwestepon
ofthecerebralcortexanditis usefultoremembertheseundereightheadings:
somethingsharpwithbarefeet.Thespinalcordcauses thelowerlimbtoflexandpullaway
fromthesharpobject.Atthesametime,itcauses theextensormuscles intheoppositelower
- senses
limbtocontractinorderto stopyoufromoverbalancing.
- actions
- thinking
Thespinalcordis strongly connectedtotheinternalorgans andbloodvessels throughnerves
- memory
thatarecalledautonomic.Autonomicnerves controltheworkings ofbloodvessels andthein-
- communication
ternalorgans liketheintestines andbladder.Someofthesefunctions,butnotall,canbecon-
- emotions
trolledbytheforebrainthroughits connections withthespinalcord.Theautonomicnerves
- sleepandalertness
connectedtothethoracicspinalcordarecalledsympatheticnerves,andthoseconnectedto
- relationship
thesacralspinalcordarecalledparasympatheticnerves.
Eachofthesefunctions canbesubdivided.For example,'senses' includes touch,taste,hear-
Thebrainstem
ing,vision,smell,andbalance,and'thinking' includes planning,decisionmakingandprob-
Thebrainstemconnects thespinalcordwiththeforebrain.Itis thehomeofbasicfunctional
lem-solving.Combinations oftheseeightfunctions givehumans higher-levelskills suchas
systems thatarevitalforsurvival.Theseincludebreathing,chewing,swallowing,vocalisa-
creativity,inventiveness,socialorganisation,andlearning.
tion,facialexpression,andeyemusclecontrol.As wellas thecontroloftheseactions,the
brainstemreceives sensoryinformationrelatedtotaste,hearing,vision,theskinoftheface,
1 2

Thebasalganglia–striatum,pallidum,andamygdala DEVELOPMENT OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
Thecerebralhemisphere's deep(non-cortical) parts includeseveralstructures,sometimes col-
lectivelyreferredtoas thebasalganglia.This termis notentirelysatisfactorybutcanbeused
The development of the nervous system
as ashorthand.Thelargerparts ofthebasalgangliaarethestriatumandpallidum,whichare
involvedininheritedandlearnedmotor functions.Whentheseareas aredamagedduringlate
About14,000genes controlthedevelopmentofthebraininmammals,morethanhalfofthe
pregnancy,thechildmaydevelopcerebralpalsy–acomplexcombinationofmusclestiffness
totalnumberofgenes.Thegenes firstprovidethegeneralinstructions forbuildingconnec-
andinvoluntarymovements.Asmaller memberof thenon-corticalstructures is theamygdala,
tions inthebrain,butlaterorganisetheuniqueconnectionpatterns thatcharacteriseeach
whichplays avitalroleinemotionalresponses (particularlyfear)andsocialgroupbehaviour.
brainregion.
Questions forrepetition
Dorsalandventralspecificationof thecells intheneuraltube
Theembryonicbraindevelops fromastripofectodermalcells thatformtheneuralplate.The
- Whatis thecentralnervous systemconsistingof?
edges oftheneuralplatecurlmediallytojoinandformtheneuraltube,whichencloses the
- How manyspinalnervepairs arethere?
neuralcanal.
- Inwhichpartofthebrainarethemostneurons?
- Whatparts oftheautonomicnervous systemexist?
This series ofdiagrams shows theformation oftheneuraltubefromtheembryonicneural
plate.Under theinfluenceofsecretedfators fromthenotochord,thecells oftheneural
platesinkdown toformagrooveandtheedges ofthegroove(red) join toformtheneural
tube.Theedges of thegrooveformthecells oftheneuralcrest,which migrateawayfrom
theneuraltubetoformganglia,melanocytes,andtheskeleton oftheface.Figurefrom
Sanes etal.2004,courtesyof Dr.Dan Sanes,NewYorkUniversity.
Atthis earlystage,thecells dorsaltotheneuralcanalaredirectedby Wnt andBMP genes to
formthetwoalar plates (whichhandlesensoryfunctions).Incontrast,thecells ventraltothe
centralcanalaredirectedbysonichedgehog(Shh)genes toformthetwobasalplates (which
areorientedtowardmotor functions).
3 4

Attherostralendoftheneuraltube,threeexpansions appear -theforebrain,midbrain and
thehindbrain vesicles.Theforebrain vesicleforms thecerebralhemispheres,thedien-
cephalon,thehypothalamus,endtheeyestalk.Thehindbrain forms theisthmus,the
rhombeencephalon,andthecerebrum.
As theneuraltubeforms fromtheneuralplate,its developmentis influcendbytheexpres-
sion of agenecalledsonichedgehog(Shh).Expression ofShh in thenotochordinduces
Theprimarydivisionintheneuraltubeis theseparationof theforebrainandmidbrainonthe
thedevelopmentoftheventralstructures (such as motor neurons)in theneuraltube.The
onehandandfromthehindbrainontheother.This separationis definedbytheexpressionof
dorsoventralpatterningoftheneuraltubeis created bytheopposinginfluences odShh
Otx2intheforebrainandmidbrainandtheexpressionofGbx2intherostralhindbrain.The
(ventrally) andBMB andWntgenes (dorsally).FigurefromSanes etal.2004,courtesyof
expressionpatternofOtx2has ledtotheproposalthatthemidbrainsegments bedeclaredpart
Dr.Dan Sanes,NewYork University.
oftheforebrain.
As theneuraltubecloses,ascatteringofcells breaks awayfromthedorsalsidetoformthe
neuralcrest,whichgives risetotheperipheralnervous system,melanocytes,bones andmus-
cles of theface. Hypothalamicsegments andtheformationofthetelencephalicvesicleandtheopticvesicle
Thefiveforebrainsegments consistoftheterminalhypothalamus (hy2),thepeduncularhypo-
thalamus (hy1),andthreediencephalicsegments calledprosomeres (p1,p2,andp3).Theter-
Brainvesicles
minalhypothalamicsegment(hy2)is therostralendoftheneuraltube.Itgives risetothete-
As cells divide,therostralendofthetubedevelops threeswellings calledtheforebrain,mid-
lencephalic(cerebral)vesicles dorsallyandtheopticvesicles rostrally,as wellas theposterior
brain,andhindbrainvesicles.Thecentralpartof theforebrainvesiclegives risetotwoexten-
lobeofthepituitary(neurohypophysis).
sions,thelateralvesicles,subsequentlyformingthecerebralhemispheres.Theroofofthe
Thetelencephalicvesicleis layered:thesurfacelayer is thepallium,andbeneathis thesub-
midbrainvesicle(thetectum) gives risetofour swellings thatgoontoformthesuperiorand
pallium,whichsplits intofourdivisions –thestriatum,pallidum,thediagonaldomain,and
inferiorcolliculi.Theroofof therostralpartof thehindbrainvesicleforms thecerebellum.
thepreopticarea.
Thesmallgroupofembryoniccells thatforms theneuraltubequicklymultiplyandspecialise
toformspecificfunctionalcentres inthebrain.Themultiplicationrateis extraordinaryand Diencephalicsegments
thefew hundredcells intheprimitivehumanneuraltubeeventuallygenerateover80billion Thethreediencephalicsegments,fromrostraltocaudal,areprosomere1(mainlytheprethala-
nervecells.Duringthefirsttwoyears of life,therearetimes whenupto250,000new cells are mus),prosomere2(mainlythethalamus),andprosomere3(mainlythepretectalarea).The
generatedeveryminute. pinealglandgrows dorsallyfromp2,andtheposteriorcommissureis foundinp3.Although
thediencephalonforms caudallytothehypothalamus,theneuraxis becomes sharplyflexed
duringdevelopment,pushingthehypothalamus intoafinalventralpositionunderthepretha-
Segmentationinthebrain
lamus.This gavetheimpressionthatthehypothalamus was aventralcomponentofthedien-
Towards theendofthenineteenthcentury,severalembryologicalstudies foundevidenceof
cephalon,as itwas wronglyassumedinanolderconceptthereof,includingthethalamus.
segmentalsubdivisions inthebrain,whichOrr (1987)calledneuromeres.Unfortunately,the
conceptofbrainsegmentationwas largelyignoredfor thenexthundredyears,beforebeing
spectacularlyconfirmedbythenew scienceof geneexpressioninthedevelopingbrain,fol- Midbrainsegments
lowingthediscoveryofgenetargetinginmicebyMarioCapecchi(1989).Sincethen,many Themidbrainconsists ofalargerostralsegment(m1)andamuchsmallercaudalsegment
studies ofgeneexpressioninthedevelopingvertebratebrainhaveconfirmedthatthebrainis (m2).Thedorsalsurfaceofm1forms thesuperior colliculus andinferior colliculus oneach
madeupof aseries ofdistinctneuromeres (Puelles etal.,2013;Watsonetal.,2017b):fivein side.Inthepast,thepretectalsegmentof thediencephalon(includingtheposteriorcommis-
theforebrain,twointhemidbrain,andtwelveinthehindbrain.Eachsegmentis madeupof sure)was mistakenlythoughttobelongtothemidbrain.Additionally,thefirstsegmentofthe
alarandbasalcomponents aroundtheneuralcanal. hindbrain,theisthmus,was alsomistakenlythoughttobelongtothemidbrain,butgeneex-
5 6

pressionproves itis not.Thesharpbendof theneuraxis atthelevelofthemidbrain(the
cephalicflexure)results fromtheunder-developmentoftheventralsurfacebutleaves thedor-
salsurfaceintact.This creates aheart-shapedprofileinsagittalsections.
Hindbrainsegments
Thehindbrainis madeupoftheisthmus andelevenrhombomeres (r1tor11).Inoldertext-
books,theisthmus,whichcontains thetrochlearnucleus,was sometimes calledrhombomere
zero(r0).Thedorsalparts oftheisthmus andrhombomere1giverisetothecerebellum.The
pontinenucleiareformedontheventralsurfaceofrhombomeres 3and4.
This is adiagramofan adultrodentbrain showingtheposition ofthesegments ofthe
hindbrain.Theembryonichindbarin contains twelvecompartments fromrostraltocaudal.
Thefirstcompartment,adjacenttothemidbrain is calledtheisthmus.Theremaining
eleven compartments arecalledrhombomeres.Rhombomeres 2to11aredefinedbytheex-
pression ofdifferenthoxgenes.Theisthmus is definedbytheexpression offgf8.Thecere-
bellumis formedbyextensions oftheisthmus andthefirstrhombomere.
Thegenes responsibleforcreatingthemajorityof therhombomeres (r2tor11)arethehome-
obox(hox)genes.Thehoxgenes,discoveredinitiallyindevelopinginsects,arealsouniver-
sallyimportantfornervous systemdevelopmentinvertebrates.Thefirstfour hoxgroups
(hox1-hox4)areexpressedinthehindbrain,and hox5-hox13 areexpressedinthespinalcord,
trunk,limbs,andtail.
Thehoxgenes arenotexpressedintheisthmus andinthefirstrhombomere,whichinsteadex-
press Gbx2,furthersubdividedby Fgf8 expressionintheisthmus. This is aphotograph ofasagittalsection of amouseembryo(E13.5) with an overlayshow-
Theneuralcanalofthehindbrainopens updorsallytoformthefourthventricle,withathick- ingthesubdivions ofthedevelopningnervous system.Theimageis taken fromtherefer-
enedlateralmargincalledtherhombiclip. enceatrlas developedbyLuis Puelles as partoftheAllen DevelopingMouseBrainAtlas
createdbytheAllen Institutefor Brain Science.
Flexionoftheneuraltube
Lackofappreciationof thesignificanceofthecephalicflexurehas ledtotragicmisinterpreta-
As mentionedabove,theneuraltubedoes notremainstraightduringdevelopment.Becauseof
tionoftherelationships betweenparts oftheforebrain,particularlythebeliefthatthehypo-
differentialdorsalandventralgrowthinsomeareas,thetubeformingthebrainis forcedinto
thalamus is simplysomekindofventraladditiontothethalamus.
flexionattwopoints.Themostsignificantof theseis thecephalicflexureinthemidbrainre-
gion.Itis soseverethatitcreates almosta180-degreebendintheneuraxis andpushes thehy-
Regionalisationinthespinalcord
pothalamus ventraltothediencephalon.Asecond,less severeflexionis foundinthehind-
Thespinalcordis traditionallydividedintoanumberof segments relatedtotheemergenceof
brain.
individualspinalnerves.Thepresenceofavertebrabetweeneachpairofspinalnerves gives
theimpressionthatthespinalcordis asegmentedstructure,butthis is anillusion,andthe
roots ofthespinalnerves runinacontinuous stripalongthecordinsidethevertebralcanal.
Ontheother hand,thereis clearevidencefromanatomicaland hoxgeneexpressionstudies
thatthespinalcordoffour-limbedvertebrates canbedividedintosixdistinctfunctionalre-
gions -prebrachial(C1-C4),brachial(C5-T1),postbrachial((T2-L1),crural(L2-S1),postcru-
ral(S2-S4),andcaudal(S5-Co2).Thebrachialandcruralregions containthemotorneurons
7 8

thatsupplythelimbmuscles oftheupperandlower limbs,respectively.Thepostbrachialand Formationofsynapses
postcruralparts containthepreganglionicneurons of thesympatheticandspinalparasympa- Developingneurons sproutthinoutgrowths calledprocesses,whichconnectwithothernerve
theticsystems,respectively.Theprebrachialregioncontains themotorneurons supplyingthe cells ormusclecells.Theconnections theymake,generallybetweenanaxonprocess onthe
cervicalmuscles,andthecaudalregioncontains motorneurons supplyingthetailmuscles. sendingsideandadendriteprocess onthereceivingside,arecalledsynapses.Muchoftheba-
sicwiringofthebrainstemandspinalcordis laiddownearlyinfetaldevelopment.These
Neuralcrest earlyconnections arethoserequiredforsurvivalas theycontrolbreathingandswallowing.
Justaftertheclosureoftheneuraltube,agroupof cells migrates awayfromthedorsalsurface Thereis noroomfor errorhere,andthesevitalconnections areformedaccordingtoastrict
oftheneuraltubetoformacolumnoneither side,calledtheneuralcrest.Theneuralcrest program.Thefirstmovements ofthefetus earlyinpregnancyinhumans areclearevidenceof
cells giverisetobothneurons (theganglioncells of theautonomicnervous systemandthe theformationofearlyconnections betweenneurons andmusclecells.Inmice,theconnec-
sensorydorsalrootganglioncells of cranialandspinalnerves)andnon-neuralelements such tions withmuscles aremadeafteronly12days ofembryonicdevelopment,buttheseconnec-
as themelanocytes oftheskinand(surprisingly)thebones andmuscles oftheface.The tions arenotmadeuntilabout12weeks inhumans.
melanocytes migratelongdistances toreachallareas oftheskinsurface. Thesecondcategoryofconnections starts lateinfetaldevelopmentandextends intochild-
hoodandadultlife.Theselaterconnections areless rigidlyprogrammed,andtheyaremade
whilethenewbornmammalinteracts withits environmentandis learningnew skills.Thepe-
Developmentoftheperipheralnervous system
riodinwhichthis typeofplasticityis mostactiveis termedthe"sensitiveperiod" forsensory
Theperipheralnervous systemis madeupofthreecomponents –theaxons ofmotorneurons
andmotorsystems andincludes ashorter"criticalperiod" duringwhichthefundamentalor-
thatconnecttomuscles,thedorsalrootganglioncells andtheirlongaxons,whichreachsen-
ganisationis determined.Itwas formerlybelievedthattheformationofnew connections
soryreceptors,andthegangliaandpostganglionicaxons ofthesympatheticandparasympa-
stoppedsometimesoonafterbirth,butitis now knownthatnew connections areanormal
theticganglioncells.Itis importanttonotethattheopticandolfactorynerves arenotpartof
partofthegrowthofallbrains throughoutlife.Theabilityofthebraintoconstantlyformnew
theperipheralnervous systemsincetheyaredirectoutgrowths oftheforebrain,withmyelin
connections andtoreshapepatterns of connectioninresponsetonew informationis referred
producedbyoligodendrocytes insteadofSchwanncells.
toas plasticity.Theplasticityofthehumanbrainis remarkable.Ithas beenestimatedthatthe
Theelements oftheperipheralnervous systemareprimarilydistributedbycranialnerves 3-12
brainforms anaverageof amillionnew connections perminutethroughoutthewholeoflife.
andbythespinalnerves.Inbothcranialandspinalnerves,theaxons ofmotorneurons grow
outuntiltheyreachtheirtargetmuscle.
Axonguidance
Anaxonthatgrows outfromaneuronwillonlybefunctionallysuccessfulifitconnects with
Adultneurogenesis
thecorrecttargetcell.Themechanismthathelps itfindits correcttargetis calledaxonguid-
Someparts ofthematuremammalianbrain,notablythehippocampus,thecerebellum,andthe
ance,oraxonpathfinding.Manygrowingaxons havebeenfoundtobeextraordinarilyaccu-
olfactorybulb,canactuallygeneratenew neurons.Inmostotherareas ofthebrain,itseems
rateinfindingtherightpathtotheirtarget.Insomecases,theaxons neurons findtheirproper
neuroplasticityappears tobesolelytheresultof themassivereorganisationofsynapticnet-
partnerbecausetheysticktomatchingmolecules onthesurfaceofotheraxons orhaverecep-
works inresponsetonew demands.
tors sensitivetomolecules madebytheirtargets,whicharebothcontrolledbyacommon
gene.Forexample,motorneuronclusters inthespinalcordandthemusclegrouptowhich
Migrationofneurons
theyconnecthavebeenshowntoshareaspecificgenemarker.Axonguidanceworks bya
Inmanyparts ofthebrain, neurons continuetodevelopintheplacewheretheywerefirst
process ofstepwiserefinement:First,thegrowingaxonfollows ageneralpathway,bundling
formed.Theseneurons maysendtheir axons toother areas inthebrain,buttheneuronalcell
withsimilaraxons andobeyinggeneralroutingcues (towhichitmayormaynotbesensitive)
bodies donotmove.However,inafew places inthebrain,groups ofneurons migratefrom
suchas crossingthemidline.Thenuponnearingits destination,itdetects morespecificchem-
theirplaceofbirthtoreachtheirfinallocation.Inthecerebralcortex,mostneurons aregener-
icalsignals fromits target.Agenepairingsystemlikethis,encodingattractantmolecules and
atedatthesurfaceoftheventricleandmigrateoutwardtofindthecorticallayerinwhichthey
thereceptors whichrespondtothem,alsoexists inthehindbrainneurongroups thatconnect
willfinallyreside.Mostoftheneurons thatmigratetowardthesurfaceofthebrain(radialmi-
toparticularcells inthecerebellum.
gration) arethefuturepyramidalandstellateneurons ofthecortex,bothofwhichareexcita-
Whatever themechanisms,theformationofearlyconnections is remarkablyaccurateandreli-
toryglutamatergicneurons.Ontheotherhand,thesmallGABAergicinhibitoryneurons of
able,sothatbrains arealways initiallywiredupinthesameway.Thegrowingaxon's tipis a
thecortexariseinthebaseof theforebrainandmigratetangentiallytoreachtheirfinalsettle-
veryactiveenlargedareacalledagrowthcone.Thegrowthconeis ahighlymobilestructure
mentinthecortex,sothefinalstructureis theproductoflargemigrations movingatrightan-
thatappears tofeelits waythroughtissue,detectingveryfaintchemicalsignals thatleaditto-
gles toeachother.TheGABAneurons constitute20% ofthecorticalneurons inmammals.
wards its targets orwhichsteeritawayfromunwantedconnections.Thesigns maybefixedin
Thelargestmigrationofneurons inthebrainbegins intherostralpartoftherhombiclip,
place,likesignposts,ormaybedistributedover longdistances,likethebreadcrumbs leftbe-
whichborders therostralendof thefourthventricleofthehindbrain.Mostoftherhombiclip
hindbyHanselandGretel.
cells migratedorsallyintothedevelopingcerebellum,whilesmallernumbers migrateven-
trallyintothelongitudinalpartofthehindbrain.Thosethatmigrateintothecerebellumform
thetinygranulecells thateventuallymakeup70% ofalltheneurons inthebrain.Becauseof
this,therhombiclipis now recognisedas themostactivecellgenerationareainthedevelop-
ingnervous system.
Thewidedispersalofneurons andmelanocytes fromtheneuralcrestconstitutes anotherma-
jorneuralmigrationduring development.Theprocess bywhichthecrestcells detachand
movethroughtissueinvolves manygenes,someof whichareimplicatedincancermetastasis.
9 10

damagetothefetalbrain.Itis possiblethatviralinfections mayalsocausecerebralpalsydur-
ingpregnancy.
Neuraltubedefects (NTD),themostcommonofwhichis calledspinabifida,arecausedbya
disruptionoftheveryearlydevelopmentoftheneuraltube,withincompleteclosureatthe
rostraland/or caudalends.Themostcommonplaceforincompleteclosureis inthecaudal
partofthespinalcord,andinthemostseverecases,thedamagetothespinalcordresults in
paralysis ofthelowerlimbandloss of controlofthebladder andbowel.Somefamilies havea
geneticpredispositiontoNTD,butthemostcriticalfactor is alackof thevitaminfolate.
Sincetheriskperiodoccurs beforeapparentsigns of pregnancy,allwomenwhomightbe-
comepregnantshouldmakesurethattheir folateintakeis high–eitherbyeatingleafyvegeta-
bles andotherfolate-richfoods orbytakingfolatevitamintablets as wellasupplement.In
manycountries,breadflourandbreakfastcereals areenrichedwithfolatetoensurethatthe
wholepopulationhas adequatefolatelevels.
Agrowth coneatthetipofan axon fromaratdorsalrootganglion neuron in cellculture. Alcoholconsumptionbywomeninthefirsteightweeks ofpregnancycanhavedevastating
Stainingfor actin (green)outlines theflattenedlamellipodium,with numerous finefilopo- effects onearlybraindevelopment,andthechildmaybebornwithsignificantdeficiencies in
diaextendingtoexploretheenvironmet.Microtubules (red)filltheaxon andextendinto brainfunction.Theconditionis calledfetalalcoholsyndrome.
thecentrallamellipodium,thesiteof activegrowth.In vivo,thegrowth conewouldhavea Withinthefirstthreemonths ofpregnancy,rubellainfection(Germanmeasles)cancausema-
three-dimensionalruffledshape.Imagecourtesyof MichaelThompson andDr.LisaFoa, jorbrainabnormalities,includingdeafness andblindness.
UniversityofTasmania,Australia. IntheWest,itis notwidelyappreciatedthatiodinedeficiencyduringfetaldevelopmentis the
mostimportantcauseofintellectualdisabilityworldwide.Butitis stillaffectingmillions of
Atthestagewhenneurons arematuringandsendingoutaxons tomakecontactwithother childreninmountainous areas ofAsia,SoutheastAsia,andsouth-easternAustralia,whereio-
neurons,thedevelopingnervous systemsecretes atapestryofguidancemolecules thatattract dinehas beenleechedoutofthesoil.Iodinedeficiencyresults inhypothyroidismthatperma-
andrepel,definingpathways,markingcrossingpoints,andidentifyingdestinations.Growing nentlydamages thedevelopingbrainbyaffectingkeygenes forconnectivity.Theproblemof
axons explorethis spacewiththeirgrowthcones,respondingtosomecues andignoringoth- iodinedeficiencyis easilyremediedwiththesupplyofiodinesupplements insaltandoil,but
ers,accordingtothereceptors theycarry.Axons fromdiverseregions convergeonshared this is notalways easytoachievebecauseoflogisticimpediments.
pathways andthenbranchouttodistincttargets as theyencounterindividualcues.Several
guidancemolecules havebeenidentified,andtheir functions havebeenanalysedindetail; Criticalperiods duringpostnataldevelopment
theyincludenetrins,semaphorins,andSlitproteins.Oncetheyreachtheirtargets,axons stop Morethansixtyyears ago,itwas shownthatkittens thathadoneeyekeptclosedduringapar-
growingbecausetheyencounter cellsurfacemolecules thatturnoffgrowthandstimulate ticularperiodafter birthwereunabletodevelopbinocular visionsubsequently.This ledtoa
synapticformation. theorythatonemustreceiveaspecificsensoryinputwithinalimitedperiodforapartofthe
Thesestopsignals varyinconcentration,soarrivingaxons mayfanoutacross thetargettissue braintodevelopnormally.This concepthadamajorimpactontheories ofpostnataldevelop-
inanorganisedgradient.Inthecaseofephrins andEphreceptors,someaxons willhavefew ment.Inparticular,itraisedserious concerns thatchildrendeprivedof aparticularstimulus or
Ephreceptors,andsomewillhavemany.If theyencounteratissuewithagradientofephrins environmentforashortperiodintheirlifemightbedeprivedforeverofsomevitalcapability.
expressed,axons withmanyreceptors willstoprespondingtosmallconcentrations ofephrins. However,this view has notbeensupportedbycontemporaryevidence,anditis now feltthat
Incontrast,thosewithfew receptors willpushpastlow-ephrinareas andstopwhenthe theconceptshouldbeappliedmoreloosely.Themodernversionofthis conceptargues that
ephrins becomemoreconcentrated.SincetheEphreceptors andephrins areregulatedbyge- criticalperiods aretheidealtimefor mostchildrentoreceiveaparticularinput.However,it
neticgradients inthetargetandtheoriginoftheaxons respectively,this simplemechanism accepts thatdelayedinputs canstillbeeffective.For this reason,theterm'sensitiveperiods' is
preserves topographicarrangements across longdistances. commonlyusedtodenotelongertimeintervals duringwhichexperiencecanshapethener-
vous system.Sensitiveperiods duringhumanpostnataldevelopmentthathavereceivedpartic-
Synapsepruningandnervecelldeath ularattentionarethoseforlanguageacquisition(mainlyninemonths tofiveyears),develop-
Notallofthesenew connections workas wellas theyshould,andmillions ofsynapses are mentofemotionalcontrol(frombirthtotwoyears),motorcontrol(frombirthtoeightyears),
prunedduringearlybraindevelopmentsothatthematuresystems formedareaccurateandef- andhabitualways ofresponding,suchas enthusiasmandpersistence(fromsixmonths totwo
ficient.Ingeneral,mostsystems follow apatternof beingover-connectedinitially,whichis years).
thenrefinedbypruning,whichcontinues throughoutlife.Thesamepruningprocess is applied
toneurons:manyarekilled off duringdevelopment,specificallythosethathavemadepoor Laterprocesses thatrefinethestructureofthebrain
connections orareotherwiseunnecessary.Thesewaves ofsynapticpruningandneuronal Thedevelopmentofthebraindoes notstopinchildhood.As notedabove,theformationof
deatharepartoftheprocess ofbuildinganefficientnervous system.As withsynapses,the new synapses continues throughoutlife.Inthecerebralcortex,this is accompaniedbythe
pruningof cells andaxonbranches continues throughoutlife. continuedgrowthofdendrites.Frombirthtoadulthood,themass ofthecortexincreases five-
foldwithoutanynew cells forming–anincreasealmostentirelyduetodendritegrowth.It
Criticalperiods infetaldevelopment has beenshownthatthereis amarkedincreaseinnew synapsegrowthinthefrontallobes
Certaindevelopmentalinsults cancausedevastatingdamagetothedevelopingbrainand duringadolescencesothatthefrontallobes arenotfullymatureuntilabout25years ofage.
spinalcord.Theseincludevitamindeficiency(neuraltubedefect),alcohol(fetalalcoholsyn- Anothervitalprocess thatoccurs duringchildhoodandadolescenceis thatofprogressive
drome),iodinedeficiency,andinfections (rubella).Eachoneofthesecancausewidespread myelination.Myelinsheaths arelaiddownduringthepostnatalyears untilearlyadulthood.
Myelinationincreases thespeedoftransmissionofactionpotentials alongaxons.This might
11 12

provideamechanismforstabilisingconnectiontimes whilethebodyenlarges.Thedistance THE SPINAL CORD
fromthespinalcordtothefootmuscles increases fromabout300mminababytoabout1000
mminanadult;ifmyelinationdidnotoccur,itcould takethirtytimes as longforacommand
Spinal Cord
toreachthemuscles inanadult.
Thedevelopmentofthecerebellumis delayedcomparedwithotherparts ofthebrain.Atthe
timeof birth,thecerebellumis extremelysmall,butduringthefirstsixyears oflifeinhu-
Thecentralnervous systemconsists oftheforebrain,brainstem,andspinalcord.Thefore-
mans,itgrows tothesizeofanorange.Thecerebellum's roleis toassistwiththecoordination
brainis comprisedofthecerebralhemispheres,olfactorystructures,hypothalamus,anddien-
ofmovement,soits developmentis delayedsothatitmatches theperiodwhenthechildis
cephalon.Thebrainstemconsists ofthemidbrain(mesencephalon) andthehindbrain
learningnew motorskills.
(rhombencephalon),comprising12segments.
Thespinalcordis thesimplestpartof thecentralnervous systemcontaining:
Neuralplasticity
Neuralplasticityrefers totheabilityofthematurebraintochangeitselfbygeneratingnew
- sensoryneurons thatreceivesensationfromthesensoryreceptors
neurons orbymakingnew connections.Therealisationthatthebraincancontinuallychange
- motorneurons thatcontrolmuscles
itself is quitenew;ithas ledtosignificantchanges inneurosciencethinking.Inthepast,itwas
- longtracts connectingthespinalcordwiththebrain
thoughtthatthestructureof thematuremammalianbraincouldnotbechangedsothatsome-
- thepreganglionicnucleioftheautonomicnervous system
onewhosufferedastroke, orsomeotherformofbraininjurywouldbecondemnedtoaper-
- patterngenerators forcomplexmovements suchas runningatdifferentspeeds
manentloss offunction.However,since1990ithas becomeevidentthatthebraincancom-
pensatebycreatingmajorchanges inconnections afterinjury,andmanyrehabilitationpro-
Thespinalcordis alongcylindricalstructureextendingfromthebaseoftheskulltothefirst
grams havebeendevelopedtotakeadvantageof this capacity.
lumbarvertebrainthehuman.Thespinalcordis noticeablythickerintheregions thatare
Theabilityto grow andmakenew connections is notrestrictedtoinjuredbrains -italsooc-
connectedtotheupperandlower limb.
curs innormalbrains asked tocopewithlargeamounts ofnew information.Forexample,an
MRI studyofthebrains of final-year medicalstudents foundthatthegreymatterintheirpari-
etalcortexandhippocampus increasedsubstantiallyin theperiodleadinguptotheirfinalex-
ams.
Apioneerintheareaofneuroplasticity,MikeMerzenich,has promotedtheideathatexercis-
ingthebraincanincreaseits capacityas adefenceagainstcognitivedeteriorationinelderly
individuals.
Questions forrepetition
- How manygenes areinvolvedinthedevelopmentofthemammalianbrain?
- How long does thematurationof thefrontalcortextake?
- Inwhichbrainareas does adultneurogenesis takeplacetoanynotableextent?
- Whatarethecomponents oftheperipheralnervous system?
- Whatarethenamesofthesignallingmoleculesthatorientventrallyordorsallyoftheneural
tube?
- WherearethefirstfourHoxgenes expressed?
- Whatis oneofthemainreasons for neuraltubedefects?
In this photograph ofmousespinalcord,thethickenedregions representtheareas ofat-
tachmentoftheupper andlower limbnerves.
Inatransversesectionofthespinalcord,acentralbutterfly-shapedareaofgreymatteris sur-
roundedbywhitematter.Thegreymatteris dividedintoventralanddorsalhorns,andthe
whitemattercanbedividedintothreefuniculi(columns)–dorsal,lateralandventral.
Thegreymattercanbefurther subdividedintoaseries oflayers calledthelaminaeofRexed.
Layers 1to4formthedorsalhornandarerelatedtosensoryinput.Layers 7to9formthe
ventralhornandhavefunctions generallytothemotor system,whilethelimbandtrunkmotor
neurons arelocatedinlamina9.Inbetweenthedorsalandventralhorns lies thelamina5,
whichis thesiteofpatterngenerators forlimbmovements.Lamina6is smallandis not
presentatalllevels.
13 14

Motorneurons inthespinalcord
Motorneurons initiatemusclefibrecontractionandsecretionof glands,actingas thefinal
commonpathwayformotorfunction's centralandperipheralneuralpathways.Themotorneu-
rons inthespinalcordbelongtotwomajor functionalgroups –somaticandautonomic.So-
maticmotorneurons innervateskeletal(voluntary)musclewhileautonomicmotorneurons in-
nervatesmoothmuscleandglands.
Somaticmotorneurons arelocatedintheventralhornofthegreyofthespinalcordinlamina
9.Thesearelargemultipolar neurons thatstainwellwithacetylcholinesteraseandNeuN
markers.
Schematictransversesection through thespinalcord.
Atransversesection of mammalian spinalcordstainedfor NeuN showingupper limbmo-
tor neurons (MN)in lamina9of theventralhorn.
Thelamina9motorneurons arelargebecausetheyeachsupportaverylongaxonthatruns to
supplythestriatedmuscles oftheaxialskeleton(muscles oftheneck,trunk,andtail)andthe
muscles oftheupperandlower limbs.Themotorneurons innervatingaxialmuscles are
presentatallspinalcordlevels.Still,thelargemotorneurons innervatinglimbmuscles are
Schematictransversesection through thespinalcordshowingimportantlaminae.
onlypresentattheleveloforiginoftheupperlimbnerves (C5toT1spinalcordsegments in
thehuman)andtheleveloforiginofthelowerlimbnerves (L3toS1spinalcordsegments in
Thespinalcordreceives sensoryinformationfromtheskin,joints,andinternalorgans;this
thehuman).
informationis processedlocallyandsenttothebrain.Themotorneurons inthespinalcord
Theautonomicmotorneurons ofthespinalcordcanbedividedintotwoseparategroups–the
connectwiththemuscles,bloodvessels,andinternalorgans andcaninitiateactivityinthese
preganglionicmotorneurons ofthesympatheticnervous systemandthepreganglionicmotor
structures.Thebrainsends nervefibrebundles (tracts)tocontrolthesemotorneurons.
neurons ofthepelvicparasympatheticsystem.
Themammalianspinalcordis madeupof sixdistinctanatomicalandfunctionalregions–one
fortheneck(prebrachial),onefortheforelimb(brachial),oneforthesympatheticoutflow
(postbrachial),oneforthelowerlimb(crural),onefor thepelvicparasympatheticoutflow
(postcrural),andalastonefor thetail(caudal).
Inthehuman,theprebrachialregionextends fromspinalcordsegments C1toC4,thebrachial
regionfromC5toT1,thepostbrachialregionfromT2 toL2,thecruralregionfromL3toS1,
thepostcruralregionfromS2toS4,andthecaudalregionfromS5tothecoccygealsegments.
Thespinalcordcontains sophisticatedpatterngenerators thatcaninitiatedifferentkinds of
coordinatedmovements.Movementpatterns generatedinthespinalcordincludelocomotion,
posture,andbalancing.
15 16

Schematicoverviewof thespinalnerves.
Below thecervicalregion,thereare12thoracicvertebraeand12thoracicspinalnerves,5
lumbarvertebraeand5lumbar spinalnerves,5sacralvertebraeand5sacralspinalnerves.
Thenumberoftail(coccygeal)vertebraevaries fromonetotwo.
In humans,thesympatheticpreganglionicmotor neurons arefoundattheT2toL2spinal Theforelimbmuscles aresuppliedbynerves fromthebrachialplexus,formedbytheC5,C6,
cord,andtheparasympatheticpreganglionicmotor neurons arelocatedfromS2toS4 C7,C8,andT1spinalnerves.Thehindlimbmuscles aresuppliedbythelumbosacralplexus,
spinalcordsegments. formedbytheL2,L3,L4,L5,andS1spinalnerves.
Spinalcordnerveroots Dermatomes
Adorsalandventralrootconnects eachspinalnervetothespinalcord.Theventralrootcon- Eachspinalnervesupplies aspecificstripof skinfromthemiddleofthebacktotheventral
tains theaxons ofmotorneurons,andthedorsalrootcontains sensoryaxons.Thecellbodies midline.Theskinareaprovidedbyasinglespinalnerveis calledadermatome.This diagram
ofthesensory axons arelocatedinthedorsalrootganglion,whichforms aswellingattached shows thedistributionof thespinaldermatomes fromC5toS1.
tothedorsalroot.
Overviewspinalnerveroots.
Thespinalnerves
Thespinalnerves arenamedfor thevertebraadjacenttotheirexit,butthenamingconvention
changes fromcervicaltothoracicandlower levels.Inthecervicalregion,thenerves are Thedermatomes ofthehuman body.
namedfor thevertebralbodybelow theirexitsothatC1exits abovetheC1vertebra,C2
abovetheC2vertebra,andsoon.However,inthethoracicandlowervertebrallevels,the
emergingnerves arenamedforthevertebralbodyabovetheirlevelofexitsothatT1exits be-
low theT1vertebra,T2below theT2vertebra,andsoon.This creates aproblemforthenerve
identityemergingbetween theC7vertebraandtheT1vertebrasinceitdoes notfiteitherof
thesedefinitions.Thesolutionwas tonamethis nervetheC8nerve,eventhoughthereis no
C8vertebra.Theresultis thatthehumanhas 7cervicalvertebraeand8cervicalspinalnerves.
17 18

Spinalcordtracts neuronis adorsalrootganglioncellwithits centralprocess enteringthespinalcordtoascend
forsomedistancebeforeitsynapses withthesecondneuroneinthechain;theaxonofthesec-
Descendingtracts inthespinalcord ondneuroncrosses themidlineimmediatelyandclimbs tothethalamus;thethirdneuron
Descendingtracts ariseinthecerebralcortexandthebrainstem.Mostdescendingtracts cross sends its axonfromthethalamus tothecerebralcortex.
inthebrainstemandthendescendineitherthelateralorventralfuniculus ofthespinalcord.
Thedescendingtracts terminateoninterneurons inlaminae5,6,and7,motorneurons inlam-
ina9,orboth.Infunctionalterms,ausefuldistinctioncanbemadebetweenthedescending
tracts inthelateralfuniculus andthoseintheventralfuniculus:thelateralfuniculus tracts
(corticospinal,rubrospinal,lateralreticulospinal) aremoreconcernedwiththecontrolof
flexormovements andparticularlymovements ofthedistalparts ofthelimbs,whereas thede-
scendingtracts oftheventralfuniculus (vestibulospinal,tectospinal,medialreticulospinal)are
moreconcernedwiththecontrolof extensor(postural)muscles ofthetrunkandproximal
parts ofthelimbs.Thecorticospinaltracttravels fromthemotorcortexthroughtheinternal
capsule,pons,andpyramid toreachthepyramidaldecussation,crossingtotheoppositeside.
Schematicoverviewof sensorypathways.
Itis importanttonotethatthecentralprocess ofthefirstneuroninthespinothalamicsystem
is short(its axonascends foronlyafew spinalcordsegments).However,themainprocess of
thefirstneuronofthedorsalcolumnsystemascends allthewaytothemedullaoblongata.
Thefirstneuronofthespinothalamicsystemascends inthedorsolateralfasciculus (justexter-
naltolamina1),andthecellbodyofthesecondneuronmaylieinlamina1,2,3,or4.
Schematicoverviewofthecoricospinaltract.
Theaxonofthesecondspinothalamicneuroncrosses themidlineintheanteriorwhitecom-
missureof thespinalcord.Itthenascends ineitherthelateralspinothalamicpathway(pain
Theinternalcapsulestripofwhitematter inthecerebralhemisphereis acommonsiteofdam-
andtemperaturesensation)ortheanteriorspinothalamictract(touchsensation).
agetothecorticospinaltractinhumans,whereahaemorrhageorbloodclotcancausea
Thedorsalcolumntracts carrytouch,deeppressure,proprioceptive,andvibrationsenseinfor-
stroke.Aninternalcapsulestrokeresults inparalysis andstiffness inthemuscles oftheoppo-
mationinthegracileandcuneatefasciculi-thegracilefasciculus mainlyconveys information
sitesideof thebody.
fromthehindlimb,andthecuneatefasciculus conveys informationfromtheforelimb.Note
Inprimates,somecorticospinalfibres makedirectcontactwithmotorneurons inlamina9.
thatthesetwopathways donotcross themidlineuntiltheyreachthebrainstem.
Still,directconnections fromthecerebralcortextomotorneurons arerareorabsentinnon–
primatemammals.Thecorticalcontrolof limbmovements innon–primatemammals is
Thespinocerebellar tracts
mainlybasedonamajorprojectiontolamina5inthespinalcord,whichcontains ahighlyor-
Thedorsalspinocerebellarandventralspinocerebellartracts conveypositionsense(proprio-
ganizedsystemoflimbmovementpatterngenerators (Levineetal.,2014).
ception)andtactileinformationtothecerebellum.Thesetracts endonthesamesideas they
Somebrainstemcentres sendtracts tothespinalcord.Thesearetherednucleus (rubrospinal
began.As withtheotherascendingfibresystems,thefirstneuronofthedorsalspinocerebellar
tract),superiorcolliculus (tectospinaltract),vestibularnuclei(vestibulospinaltracts),and
andventralspinocerebellarsystems is adorsalrootganglioncell.Inthecaseofthedorsal
reticular nuclei(reticulospinaltracts).
spinocerebellar system,thefirstneuronends bysynapsingonneurons ofthedorsalnucleus
(thenucleus ofClarke),whichis aprominentcellgroupfoundinthoracicandupperlumbar
Ascendingtracts inthespinalcord
levels (notethatthesearethesamelevels atwhichthepreganglioniccolumnofthesympa-
Boththespinothalamictracts andthedorsalcolumns (gracileandcuneatefasciculi)convey
theticnervous systemis located).Thedorsalnucleus lies justdorsolateraltothecentralcanal.
somatosensoryinformationfromonesideof thebodytothecerebralcortexoftheopposite
Theaxons ofthesecells formthedorsalspinocerebellartractinthelateralfuniculus andend
sideviathethalamus.Eachofthesesystems is basicallyachainofthreeneurons:thefirst
inthecerebellarcortexofthesameside.Theventralspinocerebellarsystemis morecompli-
19 20

catedanatomically,but,in general,itis similartothedorsalspinocerebellarsystemsinceit THE BRAIN STEM
ends inthecerebellumofthesameside.Boththedorsalspinocerebellarandventralspinocere-
bellarsystems serveonlythebody's rearhalf;thebody's fronthalfis servedbyanadditional
Brain stem
spinocerebellarsystemcalledtheexternalcuneatesystem.
Thebrainstemis madeupoftwoparts,themidbrain(mesencephalon)andthehindbrain
(rhombencephalon).Themidbrainis continuous withtheforebrain,andthehindbrainis con-
tinuous withthespinalcord.
Inoldertextbooks,thebrainstemis dividedintothreeparts:midbrain,pons,andmedullaob-
longata.Unfortunately,this schema,basedonanow outdatedview of humanbrainanatomy,
is misleadingandinaccurate.Theconfusionrelates tothemushroom–likeexpansionofthe
pons inthehumanbrainsothatitappears tobeginadjacenttothemidbrainandextendtohalf
thelengthofthehindbrain.Thetruenatureof themammalianpons is explainedintheChap-
teronbrainsegmentation.Inthemeantime,westronglyrecommendthatyouusetheterms
'midbrain' and'hindbrain' tosubdividethebrainstem.
Thebrainstemserves anumberof keyfunctions:
-thecontrolofthemuscles oftheeye,face,mouth,andthroat;controlofthesalivary
andlacrimalglands;
-controloftheinternalorgans ofthethoraxandabdomen;
-receivingsensationfromtheface,mouth,andthroat,includingtaste;
-receivingsensationfromthespecialsenseorgans forvision,hearingandbalance;
-coordinationofmovementof thelimbs andtrunk
-centers forcontrolofbreathing,micturition,anddefecation;
-centers formaintenanceofalertness;
-actingas acorridorforlongmotorandsensorypathways thatconnectthebrainwith
thespinalcord;
-andas aplaceof originof descendingmotorpathways.
Thebrainstemis connectedwiththemuscles andsensoryorgans oftheheadthroughten
pairs ofcranialnerves (cranialnerves 3to12).Thereis aseparatechapterdetailingthe
anatomyandconnections of thebrainstemcranialnerves.
Schematicoverviewofthespinocerebellar tracts.
Thebrainstemhas abasiccylindricalstructure,buttherearemajoroutgrowths fromthedor-
Questions forrepetition
salsurface.Inthemidbrain,thesedorsaloutgrowths arecalledthesuperiorandinferiorcolli-
culi–twopairs ofroundedbumps thatarereceivingcenters forvisualpathways (thesuperior
-Whichlaminaeofthespinalcordaremainlyassociatedwithmotorfunctions?
colliculi)andauditorypathways (theinferiorcolliculi).Thelargeoutgrowthfromthehind-
-Whichbrainareais frequentlyaffectedbystrokes?Whataretheconsequences?
brainis thecerebellum.Duringearlydevelopment,thecerebellumgrows outoftherostral
-Whichneurons constitutethespinalcord?
partofthehindbrain,justcaudaltothemidbrain.
-Whatsensoryinformationis transmittedinthedorsalcolumns ofthespinalcord?
-Fromwhichspinalcordsegments dothepreganglionicsympatheticnerves originate?
21 22

SECTIONSTHROUGHTHECAUDALHINDBRAIN
Thecaudalendofthehumanbrainstemis basicallysimilartosections ofthecervicalspinal
cord.However,aseries ofimportanttractrelocations changes theappearanceas weascend
throughthehindbrain.Themainchanges arethefollowing:
-Therelocationofthecorticospinaltractfromits lateralpositioninthespinalcord
toaventralpositioninthepyramidoftheoppositeside.Thecorticospinaltractis a
descendingtract,butherewearefollowingitinreverse.
Caudalhuman hindbrain atthelevelof thepyramidaldecussation.
-Theterminationofthegracileandcuneatefasciculiinthegracileandcuneate
nuclei–aftersynapsing,this pathwaycontinues bycrossingthemidline(internal
Asagittalsection through thebrain of amarmosetmonkeyshowingthemidbrain andhind-
arcuatefibers)toreachapositiondorsaltothepyramid- thenewlyformedcrossed
brain.Thecerebellumis alargeoutgrowth connectedtothedorsalsurfaceofthehind-
tractis calledthemediallemniscus.Themediallemniscus travels rostrallytoreach
brain.Thetworoundedstructures on thedorsalsurfaceofthemidbrain arethesuperior
thethalamus.
andinferior colliculi.
BRAIN STEM SECTIONS STAINED FORMYELIN
Thenextsectioninvolves theexaminationof images ofhumanbrainstemandtheidentifica-
tionof majorstructures inthesesections.Wewillfirstlookatthemainfeatures ofbrainstem
sections insummaryandthenlookatdetails withineachsection.Thesections shownhereare
stainedtoshow myelinated fibers inordertopresentaclearpictureofthemainpathways in
thebrainstem.Groups ofneurons (nuclei)donotstainandappearas paleareas inthesesec-
tions.
Hindbrain atthelevelofthegracileandcuneatenucleiandthesomatosensorydecussation.
23 24

-Afterall,thegracileandcuneatefibers havesynapsed,andthesecondaxonhas thepontinenucleicross themidlinetoreachthecerebellum.Becausethepontinenucleiare
crossedthemidlinetoreachthemediallemniscus,thedorsalregionofthebrain huge,this crossingforms amassiveoutgrowthontheventralsurfaceof thehindbrain.
stemis progressivelyvacateduntilnothingis left–theremainingspaceis occu- Thefibers travellingfromthehindbraintothecerebellumformtwothickbundles calledthe
piedbythefourthventricle. inferiorandmiddlecerebellarpeduncles.Theinferiorcerebellarpedunclecontains the
crossedolivocerebellarfibers.
Thehindbrain atthelevelofthecaudalendof thefourth ventricle.Themostoutstanding
featurehereis theinferior olive. Hindbrain attheleveloftherostralpartoftheinferior olive.
-Thecaudalendofthefourthventricleis onlyathintubethatis continuous with Therostralhindbraincontains thebasilarpontinenuclei.Theaxons fromthesenucleicross
thecentralcanal,butitexpands inmorerostralsections tocoverthewholedorsal themidlinetoformthehugemiddlecerebellarpeduncle.
surfaceofthehindbrain.
Rostralhindbrain showingthepontinenucleiandthemiddlecerebellar peduncles.
Thehindbrain atthelevelofthemiddleof thefourth ventricle. Theexternalcuneatenucleus receives positionsenseinformationfromtheupperlimband
neckandsends this informationtothecerebellumofthesameside.Theexternalcuneatenu-
cleus is locatedmedialtotheinferiorcerebellarpeduncle.
THEPRECEREBELLARNUCLEIANDTHECEREBELLARPEDUNCLES
Therostralhindbraingives risetothecerebellum,whichexpands tocovermostofthedorsal
surfaceof thehindbrain.Threelargenucleiinthehindbrainprojecttothecerebellum.They
aretheexternalcuneatenucleus,theinferiorolive,andthebasilarpontinenuclei,andarecol-
lectivelyreferredtoas precerebellar nuclei.Thefibers travellingfromtheinferioroliveand
25 26

Cerebrospinalfluidfromtheventricles oftheforebraintravels downtheaqueducttoreachthe
fourthventricle.Thefluidescapes throughholes intheroofofthefourthventricletoreachthe
subarachnoidspace.
Sections throughthepontineexpansionlookverydifferentfromthoseattheleveloftheinfe-
rior olivebecausetheyaredominatedbythehugepontinenucleiandcrossingpontinefibers.
However,somefeatures arecontinuations of structures observedinthecaudalhindbrain.
Examinethefollowingimagetoidentifythesefeatures:
Theexternalcuneatenucleus lies justmedialtothedarkinferior cerebellar peduncleatthe
dorsolateralcorner oftherostralhindbrain.
Theinferioroliveis alarge,foldednucleus intherostralhalfofthecaudalhindbrain.
-thefibers thatformthepyramidarehereswallowedupbythepontinenucleiand
crossingfibers,buttheystillformadistinctbundle.However,itis notcalledthepyra-
midhere;instead,thesefibers arereferredtoas thelongitudinalfibers ofthepons,
whicharemadeupofcorticospinalandcorticopontinefibers.
-thefibers ofthemediallemniscus arestillpresent,buttheynolongerlievertically;
theyareforcedtoassumeahorizontalposition,sittingabovethepontineexpansion.
-thefourthventricleseparates thelongitudinalpartofthehindbrainfromthecerebel-
lum.Thecerebellumforms theroofoftherostralhalfofthefourthventricle
-theinferiorcerebellarpeduncleis stillpresent,butithas moveddorsallytoenterthe
Theinferior oliveforms a distinctivebulgeon theventralsurfaceofthehindbrain,lateral cerebellum,lyinglateraltothefourthventricle.
tothepyramid.
Adominantfeatureofthis sectionis themiddlecerebellarpeduncle,butithas beencutjust
Axons of inferiorolivecells traveltotheoppositecerebellarhemisphereviatheinferiorcere- beforeitenters thecerebellum.Ontheleft-handsideofthis image,youcanseethefibers of
bellarpeduncle,wheretheyprovidetimingsignals for coordinationofmovement. thetrigeminalnerveas theytravelthroughthemiddlecerebellar peduncletoreachthesur-
face.
Thebasilar pontinenucleiconstitutethelargestgroupofneurons inthehumanbrainstem. Thenextimageshows asectionthroughtherostralendofthepontineexpansion.Itshows
Theyreceiveinputfromthecerebralcortexandsendtheiraxons totheoppositecerebellar somefeatures thatwereseeninthelowersectionbuthas someotherdistinctivefeatures.
hemisphere.Thefibers leavingthepontinenucleiformthemiddlecerebellarpeduncle.The
pontinenucleiandthecrossingpontocerebellarfibers formamassivebulgewhichcovers
mostof therostralhindbrain,seeninimages inthesectionabove.
SECTIONS OFTHEROSTRALHINDBRAIN SHOWINGTHEPONTINEEXPANSION
Next,wewillexaminesections of therostralhindbrain,wherethedominantfeatureis the
pontineexpansion.Themostusefullandmarkinidentifyingthelevelofthesesections is the
fourthventricle.Thefourthventricleis widestatthecaudalendofthepontineexpansion,and
itbecomes progressivelynarrow as itapproaches themidbrain,whereitforms thetube-like
aqueduct.
27 28

SECTIONSTHROUGHTHEMIDBRAIN
Thenextimageis asectionthroughthecaudalmidbrain.Itis particularlyinterestingbecause
this partofthemidbrainoverlaps theisthmus andtherostralpartofthebasilarpontineforma-
tion.Thedorsalpartofthesectionis atthecaudalpartoftheinferiorcolliculus ofthemId-
brain,butthemiddleof thesectionshows features of themostrostralsegmentofthehind-
brain–thedecussationofthesuperior cerebellar peduncleandthenucleus ofthetrochlear
nerve.
Asection through therostralhindbrain showingthedecussation ofthesuperior cerebellar
peduncles.
-thecorticospinalandcorticopontinefibers (longitudinalfibers ofthepons)forma
prominentbundleinthecenter ofthebasilar pontineformation
-themediallemniscus stilllies dorsaltothebasilarpons,butithas movedawayfrom
themidline
-themiddlecerebellarpeduncleis notseenherebecauseithas leftthebrainstemto
enterthecerebellum Asection through thecaudalmidbrain,showingtheoverlapwith rostralhindbrain struc-
-thefourthventriclehas shrunkdowntoasmalltubethatis abouttobecometheaque- tures –thedecussation ofthesuperior cerebellar peduncles andtherostralpontinenuclei.
ductofthemidbrain.
Themostventralpartof thesectioncuts throughthemostrostralpartofthebasilarpontine
Anentirelynew featureof this sectionis theappearanceofthesuperiorcerebellarpeduncle, formation.Lateraltothecrossingpontinefibers is averylargefiberbundleformedbythecor-
whichis averyprominentfibergroupjustdorsaltothemediallemniscus -.This peduncle ticospinalandcorticopontinefibers.This bundleis calledthecerebralpeduncle(crus cerebri).
consists offibers thathaveleftthecerebellumandareheadingtowardtheirterminationinthe
thalamus.Atthis level,thesuperiorcerebellar peduncleis crossingthemidline–thecrossing Thenextsectionis exclusivelyamidbrainsectionatthelevelof thesuperiorcolliculus.Inthe
is therefor calledthedecussationof thesuperior cerebellarpeduncle.This crossingis anim- centeris theaqueduct,whichis surroundedbythepaleperiaqueductalgraymatter.Abovethe
portantlandmarkbecauseitoccurs inthemostrostralsegmentofthehindbrain(theisthmus). periaqueductalgrayarethetwosuperior colliculi,whichhaveacharacteristicallylaminated
appearance.
Asection through thesuperior colliculus ofthemidbrain.
Below theperiaqueductalgrayaretwodarkroundmasses.Theycontainthefibers ofthesu-
periorcerebellar peduncle,whichis ascendingtowardthethalamus.However,this regionco-
29 30

incides withthelocationoflargecells of therednucleus,acellgroupthatgives risetothede- The brain stem cranial nerves
scendingrubrospinaltract.Theappearanceofthecells is obscuredbythefibers ofthesupe-
rior cerebellarpeduncle.
Lateraltotherednucleus,atthelateraledgeofthemidbrain,is theverylargecerebralpedun-
cle,whichcontains corticospinalandcorticopontinefibers thatareheadingtowards thehind- Cranialnerves 1and2(theolfactoryandopticnerves) areconnectedwiththeforebrain.The
brain.Ontheinnermarginof thedarkcerebralpeduncleis anextensivepaleareacalledthe remainingtencranialnerves (cranialnerves 3to12) arisefromthebrainstem.
substantianigra.Thereasonfortheapparentlycontradictorynameis thatinfreshbrainspeci-
mens,theareais stainedblackbyirondeposits.Someofthecells ofthesubstantianigracon-
taindopamine,andwhichprojecttomotor centers in theforebrain.
Betweentherednucleus (superior cerebellarpeduncle)andthecerebralpeduncleis theelon-
gatedmediallemniscus,whichhas beenpushedlaterally.
Animportantfeatureofthis sectionis thepresenceofstreaks offibers thatstartfromunder
theperiaqueductalgrayandwhichcoursethroughtherednucleus.Thesearefibers oftheocu-
lomotornerve,whichareheadingtotheirpointof emergencebetweenthetwocerebralpe-
duncles (this spaceis calledtheinterpeduncular fossa).
Questions forrepetition
- Whatis thedifferencebetweenthespinalcordandthecaudalendofthehindbrain?
- Inwhichsensorypathways arethesuperiorandinferiorcolliculiinvolved?
- Whatarethenames ofthethreelargenucleithatprojectfromthehindbrainintothecere-
bellum?
- Whatis thenameofthepartof thehindbrainthatis mostrostrallylocated?
Theventralsurfaceofthehuman brain showingtheorigins ofthecranialnerves.
Theoculomotornerve(3n)emerges outoftheinterpeduncularfossafromtheventralsurface
ofthemidbrain.Thetrochlear nerve(4n)winds aroundthecerebralpeduncleafterexitingthe
dorsalsurfaceoftheisthmus (themostrostralsegmentofthehindbrain).Thetrigeminalnerve
emerges fromthebasilarpons.Thetrigeminalnerve(5n) is madeupoftwoparts,alargesen-
soryroot,andasmaller motorroot.Theabducens nerve(6n)emerges fromthecaudalborder
ofthepons.Thefacialnerve(7n)andthevestibulocochlear nerve(8n)leavethehindbrain
fromthelateralpartofthetrapezoidbody.Therootlets oftheglossopharyngealnerve(9n),
vagus nerve(10n),andaccessorynerve(11n)formalineatthelateralmarginofthecaudal
hindbrain.Therootlets ofthehypoglossalnerveemergefromthelateralborderofthepyra-
mid.
Cranialnerve3–theoculomotornerve
Thepairedoculomotornucleiarefoundatthelevelofthesuperior colliculus,closetothe
midline,andventraltotheperiaqueductalgreymatter.
Thefibers oftheoculomotor nervecoursethroughtherednucleus ontheirwaytotheinterpe-
duncular fossa.Themainoculomotornucleus contains somaticmotorneurons thatsupplyall
theeyemuscles exceptthesuperior obliqueandthelateralrectus muscles.Thesmaller
Edinger–Westphalnucleus contains preganglionicparasympatheticneurons thatsupplythe
constrictorofthepupilandtheciliarymuscle.Damagetotheoculomotornerveresults inadi-
vergentsquint(theeyeontheparalyzedsideis pulledlaterallyanddownwards awayfromthe
lineofvision),droopingoftheeyelid(ptosis –duetopartialparalysis oftheeyelidraising
muscle),anddilatationofthepupil.
31 32

Cranialnerve9–theglossopharyngealnerve
Theglossopharyngealnervereceives tastefibers fromtheposteriorthirdofthetongue,which
terminates inthenucleus of thesolitarytract.Theglossopharyngealnervecontains parasym-
patheticfibers thatsupplytheparotidsalivarygland,andwhichariseintheinferiorsalivatory
nucleus.Italsosupplies asinglepharyngealmuscle,thepalatoglossus,withfibers thatarisein
Paralysis oftherightoculomotor nerve–divergentsquint,dilatedpupil,anddroopingeye-
thenucleus ambiguous.
lid.
Cranialnerve10–thevagus nerve
Cranialnerve4–thetrochlearnerve
Thevagus nervesupplies parasympatheticfibers tothethoracicandabdominalviscera.The
Thetrochlearnucleus is locatedimmediatelycaudaltotheoculomotorcomplexdorsolateral
parasympatheticnucleus ofthevagus (thedorsalmotornucleus of thevagus)lies justmedial
tothemediallongitudinalfasciculus.Whilethetrochlearnucleus was traditionallythoughtto
tothesulcus limitans insections oftheopenmedulla.Thenucleus ofthesolitarytractlies just
belocatedinthemidbrain,itis now clearthatitbelongs tothemostrostralsegmentofthe
lateraltothedorsalmotornucleus ofthevagus.Itreceives tastefibers fromthefacial,glos-
hindbrain,calledtheisthmus.Thesmalltrochlear nerveexits thedorsalsurfaceofthebrain-
sopharyngealandvagus nerves,andgeneralvisceralafferentfibers fromthevagus nerve.The
stem.Itcrosses themidlineinthesuperior medullaryvelumbeforewindingaroundthecere-
nucleus ambiguous contains largemultipolarmotor neurons,whichsupplythepharynx,
bralpeduncletosupplythesuperior obliquemuscleoftheeye.
palate,andlarynxmuscles viathevagus,cranialaccessory,andglossopharyngealnerves.
Cranialnerve5–thetrigeminalnerve
Cranialnerve11–theaccessorynerve
Thetrigeminalnervesupplies theskinof thefaceand themuscles ofmastication(thechewing
Thecranialpartoftheaccessorynervearises fromthenucleus ambiguous andis considered
muscles).Thesensoryfibers ofthetrigeminalnerveconnecttoaseries oflargenucleiextend-
bymanytobejustapartofthevagus nerve.Itcontributes tothevagalsupplyofthepharynx.
ingfromtherostralhindbraintothespinalcord.Theprincipalsensorytrigeminalnucleus is
Thespinalrootoftheaccessorynerveis amotornervesupplyingsternomastoidandtrapezius
foundatthelevelwherethetrigeminalnerveconnects withthehindbrain.Thetrigeminalmo-
muscles intheneck.Itarises frommotoneurons incervicalspinalcordlevels C2toC4.It
tornucleus lies medialtotheprincipalsensorynucleus.Thetworemainingnucleiofthe
travels intothecranialcavitytojoinbrieflywiththevagus nervebeforedescendingintothe
trigeminalcomplexarethespinal(descending) andmesencephalicnuclei.Thespinalnucleus
posteriortriangleoftheneck.
is foundinthedorsolateralhindbrainatalllevels below theprincipalnucleus andis continu-
ous caudallywiththesubstantiagelatinosaofthespinalcord.Themesencephalicnucleus of
Cranialnerve12–thehypoglossalnerve
thetrigeminalsystemis smallanddifficulttoseeinlow powersections.Itconsists ofasingle
Thehypoglossalnervesupplies themuscles ofthetongue.Thehypoglossalnucleus lies im-
layer of largeroundcells ontheedgeof theperiaqueductalgraymatterofthemidbrain.
mediatelydorsaltothemediallongitudinalfasciculus andis medialtothedorsalmotornu-
cleus ofthevagus inthefloorofthefourthventricle.Thehypoglossalnervefibers travelven-
Cranialnerve6–theabducens nerve
trallytoemergebetweentheinferioroliveandpyramid.
Theabducens nervesupplies thelateralrectus muscleoftheeye.Theabducens nucleus lies
nexttothemidlineclosetothemediallongitudinalfasciculus.Thefibers oftheemergingab-
ducens nervecanbeseenrunningdorsoventrallythroughthetegmentumofthehindbrain.
Functionalclassificationof motorandsensorynervefibers
Cranialnerve7–thefacialnerve
Thefibers thattravelinthecranialnerves canbeclassifiedonthebasis of theirfunctions.
Thefacialnervesupplies themuscles oftheface.Italsosupplies tastesensoryfibers tothe
Efferent(motor)fibers areclassifiedas eithersomaticefferent,visceralefferent,orbranchial
frontof thetongueandparasympatheticfibers tothesubmandibularsalivaryglandandother
efferent.
smallglands inthehead.Themotorfibers leavingthemainfacialnucleus takeanunusual
Afferent(sensory)fibers areclassifiedas somaticsensory,visceralsensory,orspecialsensory.
coursethroughthehindbrain.Theytraveldorsomediallytocurlaroundtheabducens nucleus
Thefollowingtablesummarises thefunctionalcomponents ofeachofthecranialnerves
beforeheadingventrolaterallytoexitthebrainstemventraltothetrigeminalsensorynucleus.
Tastefibers inthefacialnerveconnectwiththenucleus ofthesolitarytract.
Cranialnerve8–thevestibulocochlearnerve
Thevestibulocochlearnervereceives sensoryfibers fromtheorgans ofbalance(mainlythe
semicircularcanals)andhearing(thecochlea).Inatransversesectionofthejunctionofthe
pons andmedulla,thevestibulocochlearnerveenters thebrainstemas twoseparatebundles,
whichstraddletheinferiorcerebellarpeduncle.Thoseenteringventraltothepedunclearethe
vestibularfibers,whilethoseseendorsalandlateralto thepedunclearethecochlearfibers.
Thedorsalandventralcochlearnucleiarepaleareas embeddedwithinthefibers ofthe
cochlearnerveas is arches aroundthepeduncle.Thedorsalcochlearnucleus is themore
prominentofthetwo;itis easilyrecognizableinsections as itsurmounts theinferiorcerebel-
larpeduncle.Fournucleicomprisethevestibular nuclearcomplex.Theyarenamedsuperior,
lateral,medial,andspinal(descending)vestibular nuclei.Thesefournucleiarearranged
withinadiamond-shapedareainthefloor ofthefourthventricle.
33 34

The cerebellum
Thecerebellumis anoutgrowthof therostralhindbrain,arisingfromtheregionjustcaudalto
themidbrain(theisthmus andthefirstrhombomere).Thedevelopingcerebellumis relatively
smallatbirth,butitgrows rapidlyinthepostnatalperiod.
Thecentralwhitematterofthecerebellumis arrangedlikethetrunkof atree,withaseries of
majorbranches coveredwithgreymatter.Inamid–sagittalsection,thecerebellumlooks like
asliceofcauliflower,withbranches ofwhitematter formingthemajorlobules ofthecentral
partofthecerebellum.Thepartof thecerebelluminthemidlineis calledthevermis.Thever-
mis consists oftenrecognizablelobules inallmammals.
Thecerebralcortexrelies onthecerebellumforthecoordinationofmovement.Thecerebral
cortexrequests informationfromthecerebellumviathehugecorticopontinepathwaythat
travels totherostralhindbrainandwhichsynapses inthepontinenuclei.Thepontinenuclei
sendtheiraxons totheoppositesideofthecerebellumviathemiddlecerebellarpeduncle.
Thecerebellumresponds torequests fromtheforebrainviathesuperior cerebellarpeduncle,
whichtravels totheventrolateralthalamicnucleus oftheoppositeside.Theinferiorcerebellar
pedunclecarries fibers thatariseinthespinalcordandbrainstemontheirwaytothecerebel-
larcortex.
Questions forrepetition
- Whichcranialnerves areconnectedtothebrainstem?
- Nametheconsequences of paralysis ofthethirdcranialnerve.
- Whatis thefifthcranialnervealsocalled?
- Whatis thefunctionofthesixthcranialnerve?
- Whatdotheparasympatheticfibers oftheglossopharyngealnerveinnervate?
- How manyfunctionalcomponents does theeleventhcranialnervehave?
Thedorsalspinocerebellar tractandthepathways connectingthecerebellum,thalamus,
motor cortex,andpons.
35 36

Lobules of the cerebellar vermis and the cerebellar hemisphere
Thevermis ofthecerebelluminallmammals is dividedintotenlobules byaseries ofdeep
fissures.Thelargestofthesefissures is theprimaryfissure,whichdivides theanteriorvermis
(lobules 1-5)fromtheposterior vermis (lobules 6-10).Eachofthelobules has atraditional
Latinname,buttheonlyoneworthrememberingis thenodule,whichis thenameforlobule
10.Thehumancerebellarhemisphereis extraordinarilyelaborate,markedbyhundreds ofin-
dividualfoliathatrunfrommedialtolateral.
Adiagramofthehuman cerebellumshowingthevermis andthehemispheres (a)andthe
deepcerebellar nuclei(c).
The cerebellum has an ipsilateral connection with the body
Eachsideof thecerebralcortexis connectedtosensoryandmotoractivities ontheopposite
sideofthebody,buteachsideof thecerebellumis connectedtothesamesideofthebody.
Whenonecerebellarhemisphereis damaged,theclassicsymptoms ofcerebellardamage,
whichareincoordinationofvoluntarymovementandtremor,occuronthesamesideas the
damage.
(a)Asagittalsection
The role of the cerebellum in motor control
Thecerebellumis responsiblefor thecoordinationofcomplexmovements.Itdoes this by
comparingthemotorcommands withtheactualbodymovements thatresult.Onthebasis of
this comparison,itcanadjustmotorcontroltoimproveaccuracy.This monitoringandfeed-
backoccurin real-timeandis mostimportantatthecrucialendstages ofapurposefulmove-
ment.Thecerebellumplays avitalroleinthemanagementofpostureandbalance;itreceives
Asagittalsection ofratcerebellumshowingtheten lobules ofthevermis.Thedeepprimary inputfromthevestibularsystemsothatitcanmonitorthepositionofthebodyinspace,andit
fissureseparates lobules 1-5(on theleft) fromlobules 6-10(on theright). canmakemajor posturaladjustments if thepersonis indangeroflosingtheirbalance.
Inprimates,thecerebellumis vitalforcoordinatingthemovements of thehands andeyes.For
monkeys,lifeinthetrees depends entirelyontheabilitytoplanandexecuteacrobaticleaps
Thecenterofthecerebellumis filledwithfibers –calledthedeepcerebellarwhitematter.
involvingthecerebellum,vestibularsystem,eyes,andhands.Humans havethemostsophisti-
Embeddedinthewhitematterarethreedeepcerebellarnucleioneachside.Thelargestof
catedversionofbinocularvisionamongtheprimates andhavelongfingers andopposable
thesenucleiis thedentatenucleus,whichis laterallyplaced.
thumbs.Thehumancerebellumhas evolvedtocapitalizeonthesecapacities throughthepre-
cisecoordinationofskilledfinger movements.Thefinecoordinationoffingermovementun-
derthecontrolofbinocularvisionhas givenhumans access totoolmanufacture.
Cerebellar peduncles
Thecerebellumis connectedtothehindbrainbythreecerebellarpeduncles oneachside:the The histological structure of the cerebellar cortex
inferiorpedunclemainlycontains fibers enteringthecerebellumfromthespinalcordandthe thecerebellarcortexis madeupofthreelayers,theoutermolecularlayer,thePurkinjecell
inferiorolive;thehugemiddlepedunclecontains fiberprojectingfromthebasilarpons tothe layer,andtheinnergranulecelllayer.Deeptothegranulecelllayeris thedeepcerebellar
cerebellum;thesuperiorpedunclecontains fibers thatleavethecerebellumtotravelthrough whitematter.
therednucleus toreachthethalamus. Thestructureofthecerebellar cortexis extraordinarilyuniform;thesamethreelayers are
seeninallparts of thecerebellum,andtheir relativethickness does notvary.Deeptothecor-
texis thedeepcerebellarwhitematter.
ThelargePurkinjecells aretheoutputcells ofthecerebellarcortex.Theiraxons projecttothe
cerebellarnuclei.
37 38

jointreceptors andmusclestretchreceptors,butitnow appears thatmostoftheinputcomes
fromreceptors thatdetectsensations of stretching,contact,orfoldingintheskin.Thesesensa-
tions provideveryfinedetailonthemovementofthelimbs andotherbodyparts.
Questions for repetition
- Of how manylayers is thecortexofthecerebellumconstituted?
- Is thecerebellumalsoconnected"side-wiseinverted" withthemuscles oftheotherhalfof
thebody?
- Towhichcells dothegranulecells sendtheir axonpotentials?
- How canthecerebellumcoordinatethecorrecttimingofmovementsignals?
- Whatareclassicsymptoms ofdamagetothecerebellum?
Cerebellar cortex.TheNisslstainedsection aboveshows themolecular layer (MoCb),the
Purkinjecelllayer (Pk),thegranulecelllayer (GrCb),andthedeepcerebellar whitematter
(cbw).Thediagrambelow shows thedendritictreeofaPurkinjecellin themolecular layer
andthetermination ofthePurkinjecellaxon in adeepcerebellar nucleus.
Mossy fibers and climbing fibers
Mostofthefibers projectingtothecerebellarcortexaremossyfibers thatsynapsewithgran-
ulecells.Theexceptionis theinputfromtheinferior olive,whichgoes directlytotheden-
dritictrees ofthePurkinjecells intheformof climbingfibers.Themossyfibers arisefrom
cells inthepontinenucleiandotherlargeprecerebellarnucleiinthehindbrainandfromthe
spinalcord.Thegranulecells sendtheiraxons tothedendrites ofPurkinjecells.Thegranule
cells aretinybutverytightlypacked-aboutonemillionpercubicmillimeter;thegranule
cells compriseabout70%ofalltheneurons inthebrain.As notedabove,theaxons fromthe
inferiorolivarynucleus formclimbingfibers,whichmakedirectcontactwiththedendritic
trees ofthePurkinjecells.Thereis evidencethattheinferiorolivarycells controlthetime
codeof thecerebellum,thus ensuringthateverylearnedmovementis playedbackinexactly
therighttimingsequence—theinferior olivecells fireatabout10Hz(tenactionpotentials per
second).
Microelectroderecordings intheratsuggestthateveryfoliuminthecerebellumcodes adif-
ferentmovementsequence.Forexample,someareconcernedwithtakingfoodwiththefin-
gers andtransferringittothemouth,andothers areinvolvedinrunningbehavior.Giventhe
tens ofthousands offoliainthehumancerebellum,itis possiblethatthecerebellumkeeps
learningnew movementsequences intoadultlife.Perhaps thereis evenabackhandfoliumin
keentennis players!
Thelargestconnectionofthehumancerebellumis theconnectionwiththemotorcortex.The
hugecorticopontinepathwayarises fromthecerebralcortex,synapses inthepons,andenters
thecerebellumthroughthemiddlecerebellarpeduncle.This seems tobeawayforthemotor
cortextoaskforhelpfromthecerebellumwhencoordinationofacomplexmovementis re-
quired.Theanswercomes backtothemotorcortexviathesuperiorcerebellarpeduncle.The
fibers ofthesuperiorcerebellar pedunclesynapseintheventrolateralnucleus ofthethalamus,
andthethalamocorticalfibers traveltothemotorcortex.
Therelationshipbetweencellnumbers inthecerebralcortexandthecerebellumis verycon-
sistentacross themammaliangroups.Althoughthesizeofthecerebralcortexvaries agreat
dealfromonemammalianfamilytoanother,theproportionalrelationshipbetweenthenum-
ber ofcerebralcorticalcells andthenumberof cerebellarcells is thesame–about1:4.
Themainwaythecerebellumtracks movementinthelimbs is fromsensations fromtheskin.
Itusedtobethoughtthatthemostimportantinformationonmovementwouldcomefrom
39 40

DIENCEPHALON Itis notnecessarytomemorizethenames of allthethalamicnuclei;thekeyones arethenu-
cleithatconnecttothemainsensorypathways–ventroposterior (VP,somatosensory),dorsal
lateralgeniculate(DLG,vision),andmedialgeniculate(MG,hearing),towhichshouldbe
The diencephalon
addedtheventrolateralnucleus (VL),whichreceives inputfromthecerebellumandglobus
pallidus andprojects tothemotorcortex.Theremainingthalamicnucleiprojecttoassociation
Thediencephalonsits betweenthemidbrainandthehypothalamus.Thecentralpartofthedi-
areas ofthecerebralcortex.
encephalonis thethalamus.Theother parts ofthediencephalonaretheprethalamus infront
Thedorsomedialedgeof thethalamus carries thehabenularnuclei,towhichareattachedthe
ofthethalamus andthepretectalareabehind.Eachofthethreeparts ofthediencephalonis a
stalkof thepinealgland.Thepinealglandsecretes melatonin,whichinfluences thesleepcy-
completesegmentoftheneuraltube,withalar andbasalcomponents,calledthediencephalic
cle.
prosomeres:thepretectalareais includedindiencephalicprosomere1;thethalamicareais in-
cludedindiencephalicprosomere2;theprethalamus is includedindiencephalicprosomere3.
Prethalamus
Theword‘diencephalon’means ‘interbrain’–referringtothefactthatthis regionlinks the
Themostrostraldiencephalicprosomere(p3) contains thezonaincerta–animportantregion
mainparts oftheforebrain withthebrainstem.
formotorcontrol.InParkinson’s disease,stimulatingelectrodes thatareinsertedintothezona
incertacanminimizetremors andmusclestiffness inpatients withParkinsonism.This is
calleddeepbrainstimulation(DBS),andthetreatmentis usuallyverysuccessful.Thereticu-
larnucleiofp3playanimportantroleduringsleepbycontrollingtheoutputofthethalamus
tothecortex.After sleepis established,theinhibitory(GABAergic)neurons ofp3takecon-
troloftheactivityofthemainthalamicnucleitosetuparhythmicwavepatternofelectrical
activityinthecortex.
Pretectal area
Themostcaudaldiencephalicprosomere(p1)contains thenucleiofthepretectalarea.These
nucleiplayaroleinvisualreflexes.Aprominentp1landmarkatthejunctionoftheprethala-
mus withthemidbrainis theposteriorcommissure,whichbelongs top1andnottothemid-
brain,as previouslysupposed.
Questions for repetition
- Of whatparts does thediencephalonconsistof?
- Describethespatialrelationshipofthethalamus andhypothalamus fromadevelopmental
perspective?
- Whichthalamicnucleus is integratedintothevisualpathway?
- Whichpartofthediencephalonis stimulatedwithdeepbrainstimulationtocombat
Parkinsonism?
Adiagramshowingthesegmentalcomponents ofthedevelopingbrain.Thediencephalic
- Inwhichfunctionis thepretectalareainvolved?
segments p1,p2,andp3areshown.Notethehabenular stalkatthecaudalendofthedorsal
surfaceofthethalamus.
Thalamus
Inamid-sagittalsectionofthebrain,thethalamus sits dorsaltothehypothalamus.This ledto
along-heldmisunderstandingthatthehypothalamus is actuallyventraltothethalamus in
topologicalterms.However,therelationshipbetweenthetwois notas itseems.Becauseof
thesharp(almost180degrees) bendingof theneuraxis atthemidbrainduringdevelopment
(thecephalicflexure),thehypothalamus is actuallyrostraltothediencephalonindevelop-
mentalterms.
Thethalamus receives inputfromallthesensorysystems excepttheolfactorysystem.Eachof
thevisual,auditory,andtouch(somatosensory)sensorypathways terminates inits ownspe-
cialpartofthethalamus:thevisualpathwayends inthedorsallateralgeniculatenucleus;the
auditorypathwayends inthemedialgeniculatenucleus;thetouchpathwayends intheventro-
posterior nucleus.Eachofthesesensorythalamicnucleithensends sensoryinformationtothe
corticalareareservedforthatmodality.Inaddition,informationonmovementcoordination
fromthecerebellumalsoreaches theventrolateralnucleus ofthethalamus,andtheinforma-
tionis sentontothepartofthecortexconcernedwith motorcontrol–theprimarymotorcor-
tex.
41 42

HYPOTHALAMUS
The hypothalamus
Thename'hypothalamus' is derivedfromanoutdatedview thatthehypothalamus was simply
aventraladditiontothethalamus.New datafromdevelopmentalgeneexpressionhas re-
vealedafarmorecriticalrolefor thehypothalamus.Itis now clearthatthehypothalamus is
formedfromthemostrostralpartoftheneuraltube,anditis responsibleforgeneratingthe
wholeof thetelencephalonfromits alar plate.Itis byfarthemostcrucialcenterinthedevel-
opinghumanbrain.
Oneofthereasons formisunderstandingtheproperanatomicalplaceofthehypothalamus is a
lackof appreciationoftheeffectof thecervicalflexureofthedevelopingneuraltube.This se-
verebendintheembryonicneuraxis pushes thehypothalamus toits adultpositionunderthe
thalamus.
Thehypothalamus comprises thefirsttwoneuralsegments –theterminalprosomereandthe
peduncular prosomere.Theterminalhypothalamicprosomeregives risetotheeyeandthete-
lencephalonfromits alarplate,givingrisetotheposteriorpituitaryglandfromits basalplate.
Thepeduncularhypothalamicprosomereis connected toprosomere3ofthediencephalon
Features ofthehypothalamus seeninamid-sagittalsection
Inamid-sagittalsectionofthebrain,theprominentanatomicallandmarks ofthehypothala-
mus canbeseen–theopticchiasmrostrally,themammillarybodies caudally,andthepitu-
itarystalkbetweenthetwo.
Themostrostralpartofthehypothalamus sits abovetheopticchiasm.Thehypothalamicnu-
cleus sittingimmediatelyabovethechiasmis appropriatelycalledthesuprachiasmaticnu-
cleus.This nucleus serves as a24-hourclockforthebrain;its neurons haveaninternaltiming
systemthatcanbeadjustedwithlightintensityinformationfromtheopticnerves.Ifanani-
malis keptincompletedarkness,theclockreverts toa25-hourcycle.Theclockis essential
forthetimingofpeaks ofhormonalsecretions fromendocrineglands.
Thecentralpartofthehypothalamus thatbears thepituitarystalkis calledthetubercinereum.
Thehypothalamus andsurvivalbehaviors
Asagittalsection oftheratbrain showingthemain parts ofthehypothalamus.
Duringvertebrateevolution,complexbehaviors andmovementsets becameorganizedinahi-
Thepituitarystalkis attachedclosetoVMH.
erarchyof modules inthebrain.Atthetopofthehierarchyarebehaviors relatingtothesur-
MB=mammillarybody;Pa=paraventricular nucleus;SCh=suprachiasmaticnucleus;
vivaloftheindividualandthespecies.Theseincludeeating,drinking,defensivebehaviors,
VMH=ventromedialhypothalamicnucleus.
reproduction,andthebasicmovementpatterns neededtoexploretheimmediateenvironment.
Thesesurvivalbehaviors areprimarilycontrolledbythehypothalamus.Thehypothalamic
controlcenters forsurvivalbehaviors areclusteredintwomaingroups.Thefirstgroupin-
cludes systems fordefense,reproduction,andingestion(feedinganddrinking).Thenuclei
thatcontrolthesebehaviorsets,includingthelargeventromedialnucleus,arelocatedinthe
medialhalfofthehypothalamus.Eachspecificbehaviorset,suchas eating,is relatedtoone
particularsetofhypothalamicnuclei.Thesecondgroupofsurvivalbehaviororganizers is lo-
catedinthemammillarybodyinthecaudalpartofthehypothalamus andinnearbymidbrain
parts (thesubstantianigraandtheventraltegmentalarea).This secondgroupinitiates ex-
ploratoryandforagingbehaviors,suchas turningtheheadandeyes towardanobjectofinter-
estandwalkingorrunningtoexplorethesurroundings.
43 44

Controlof theendocrinesystembythehypothalamus Thecontrolovertheanteriorpituitaryis notas direct:cells intheparaventricularnucleus re-
Thehypothalamus has severalpowerfulneurongroups thatcontrolthehormonalsecretions of leasetinyamounts ofreleasinghormones intoaspecializedportalbloodsystemthatcarries
thepituitarygland.Langdon-Brownfamouslydescribedthepituitaryglandas 'theleaderin themtotheanteriorpituitary.Aportalbloodsystemhas twosets ofcapillaries connectedbya
theendocrineorchestra' (Hubble,1961).This is aclevermetaphorthatreserves theroleofthe portalvein.Inthecaseofthepituitary,thefirstcapillarybedcollects thereleasinghormones
conductor oftheorchestrafor thehypothalamus.Inanorchestra,theconductorgives direc- fromthehypothalamus.Smallportalveins transportthereleasinghormones tothesecond
tions tothefirstviolin,whois theorchestra's leader. capillarybedintheanterior pituitary,wheretheyreachendocrinesecretingcells.Thereleas-
Hypothalamiccontrolovertheposterior pituitaryis direct.Largeneurosecretorycells inthe inghormones stimulatethereleaseofthemajorhormones fromanteriorpituitarycells -
paraventricularandsupraopticnucleisendtheir axons totheposteriorpituitary,releasingoxy- growthhormone(GH),thyroid-stimulatinghormone(TSH),adrenocorticotrophichormone
tocinandvasopressinintothebloodstream.Oxytocinstimulates contractionoftheuterus at (ACTH),follicle-stimulatinghormone(FSH),prolactin(PRL),andluteinizinghormone(LH).
birthandinitiates milksecretionafterbirth.Italsoplays animportantroleinadultpair-bond-
ingandmaternal-infantattachment.Vasopressin,alsocalledantidiuretichormone(ADH),in-
creases bloodpressureandcontrols urineproduction.
Thehypothalamus secretes releasinghormones which stimulatetheendocrinecells ofthe
anterior pituitarytoreleasetheir hormoneproducts.Thereleasinghormones aredelivered
tohypothalamiccapillaries thatdrain intoveins which formaspecialportalvenous system.
Theportalveins endin asecondcapillarysystemin theanterior pituitary.
Hypothalamicsecretion of theposterior pituitaryhormones oxytocin andADH(vaso-
pressin).Thehormones areproducedbyneurosecretorycells in theparaventricular nu-
Questions forrepetition
cleus andarereleasedfromaxon terminals thatreach theposterior pituitary.
- Fromwhichprosomeres does thehypothalamus arise?
- Whichhypothalamicnucleus is responsiblefordeterminingthecircadianrhythm?
- Whichhypothalamicstructures areinvolvedinbehaviors suchas foragingandexplo-
ration?
- Whathormones aresecretedintheposteriorpituitarygland?
- Whatkindofhormones aresecretedintheanterior pituitarygland?
45 46

Telencephalon
The Telencephalon
TELENCEPHALON –THECEREBRALHEMISPHERES
Thetwotelencephalicoutgrowths arisefromthedevelopinghypothalamus.Thetelencephalic
outgrowthoneachsideforms thecerebralhemisphereorcerebrum.Thecerebralhemisphere
ofeachsideconsists ofanouterlayeror palliumandasubpalliallayer.Thepalliumincludes
thecortex.Thesubpalliumforms severaldeepcellgroups,thelargestofwhicharethestria-
tumandpallidum(sometimes calledthebasalganglia).
Thetwotelencephalicoutgrowths arisefromthealar plateoftherostralhypothalamicseg-
ment.This diagramshows onlyonetelencephalicoutgrowth.Thetelencephalon forms the Acoronalsection through theforebrain ofamouseshowingthefour pallialareas –medial
pallium(thefuturecortex)andthesubpallium(mainlythestriatumandpallidum). pallium(MP),dorsalpallium(DP),lateralpallium(LP),andventralpallium(VP).The
corpus callosumseparates themedialpallium(hippocomapus) formthedorsalpallium
Thepalliumcanbedividedintomedial,dorsal,lateral,andventral.Inmammals,mostofthe (neocortex).
cerebralcortexis derivedfromthedorsalpalliumand is calledtheneocortex.Theareas deriv-
ingfromtheventralpalliummainlybelongtotheolfactorysystem.Theolfactorycortexis
sometimes referredtoas allocortex.
Thesmallerlateralpallium,whichlies betweentheneocortexandtheolfactorycorticalareas,
forms asmallareaoftheneocortexcalledtheinsula,whichis mainlydevotedtotasteandvis-
ceralsensation.Themedialpallialsubdivisiongives risetothehippocampus.
Neocortex
Thehumanneocortexis massivelyexpanded.Foldingincreases its surfacearea,forming
raisedareas (gyri)andgrooves (sulci).
Thepattern ofsulciandgyrivaries fromperson toperson,butsomegyrican beconsis-
tentlyidentified.
47 48

Thecerebrumcanbedividedintolobes,whicharenamedfortheoverlyingcranialbones –
frontal,parietal,temporal, andoccipital. Atahistologicallevel,theneocortexis madeupof sixwell-definedlayers,numberedoneto
six.Theprimarysensoryareas arecharacterizedbydenselayers ofgranulecells -layers 2and
4.Theprimarymotorcortexis characterizedbyaprominentpyramidalcelllayer(layer5)and
avirtualabsenceofthemaingranulecelllayer(layer4)andsois oftenreferredtoas the
agranularcortex.Manypyramidalcells inlayer5areverylarge,sendingaxons overgreatdis-
tances toreachmotorneurons inthespinalcord.
Thelobes ofthecerebrumas viewedfromthelateralside.Thecentralsulcus separates the
frontalandparietallobes.Thelateralfissureseparates thetemporallobefromthefrontal
andparietallobes.
Theneocortexhas well-definedsensoryareas for thereceptionoftouch(S1),vision(V1),
hearing(A1),andtaste.Thevisualcortexis locatedin theoccipitalpoleofthecortex,andthe
auditorycortexis locatedin thetemporallobe.Thetouch(somatosensorycortex)is located
rostrallynearthefrontalpole.Theneocortexhas noolfactorysensoryareabecauseallolfac-
toryinformationprojects totheventralcorticalareas –theolfactorybulb,olfactorytubercle,
andpiriformcortex.Infrontof thesomatosensorycortexis theprimarymotorcortex–an
areadevotedtovoluntarymotor controloftheoppositesideofthebody.Electricalstimulation
ofthemotorcortexproduces movements ontheoppositesideofthebody.Themotorcortex
sends amajorpathwaytothebrainstem(corticobulbartract)andanothertothespinalcord
(corticospinaltract)toinitiatemovements.
Acoronalsection ofthemouseforebrain showingthehistologicaldifferencebetween the
primarymotor cortex(M1)andprimarysomatosensorycortex(S2).Thegranular layer 4is
missingfromM1butveryprominentin S1.
TheHippocampus
Thehippocampus is thepartof thecerebralcortexthatis involvedinmemorysystems.The
hippocampus arises fromthemedialpallium.Itconsists of thedentategyrus,thethreeCAre-
gions,thesubiculum,andtheentorhinalcortex.Thehippocampus is responsibleforshort-
termmemoryregistration.
Theentorhinalcortexis locatedintheparahippocampalgyrus is likeaGPS thatcontains a
precisetwo-dimensionalgridmapof surroundings;ithelps tolinkthememoryofevents to
theplaceinwhichtheyoccurred.Theentorhinalcortexsends placeinformationtothehip-
pocampus inachainofconnections fromthedentategyrus,theCA3region,andfinallytothe
CA1region.TheCA1regionsends its informationtothesubiculum,whichis theoutputcen-
terforthehippocampus.Thesubiculumprojects totheseptumandhypothalamus viaalarge
fiberbundlecalledthefornix.
Subpallialstructures
Under thecoveringofthepalliumareanumberoflargespecializedneurongroups.The
largestofthesegroups arethestriatumandpallidum,whichplayessentialroles inthecontrol
Theprimarysensoryandmotor areas in thecortex. Theprimarysomatosensoryarea(S1)
ofmovements.Thesmaller subpallialgroups (theamygdala,septum,andpreopticarea)are
is separatedfromtheprimarymotor area(M1)bythecentralsulcus.Theprimaryauditory
concernedwithemotionalexpressionandbehaviorpatterns.
areais separatedfromS1bythedeeplateralfissure(notlabeledhere).Theprimaryvisual
areais almostentirelylocatedon themedialsideoftheoccipitallobe.Thetasteareacannot
beseen in this diagrambecauseitis hidden in thelateralfissure.
49 50

Striatumandpallidum–the'basalganglia' Theamygdala
Thelargestofthesubpallialgroups arethestriatumandglobus pallidus.Traditionalterminol- Theamygdalalies deeptothepiriform(primaryolfactory) cortexonthemedialsideofthe
ogyrefers tothis pairas the'basalganglia.' Unfortunately,differentbooks usethetermbasal temporallobe,justrostraltothehippocampus.Theamygdalais acomplexstructuremadeup
gangliainavarietyofdifferentways,someaddingtheamygdalaandotherdeepforebrain ofmanydifferentsubnuclei.Thesubnucleioftheamygdalacanbedividedintotwomain
structures,andsomeevenaddingparts ofthediencephalonandmidbrainsuchas thezonain- groups –amedicalgroupthatis interconnectedwiththeolfactorysystemandalateralgroup
certaandsubstantianigra. Becauseof this,itis besteithertoavoidtheuseofthetermbasal thatis connectedtocircuits involvedinemotionalresponses,particularlyfear.Thelateral
gangliaaltogetherortomakeitclear whenyouarereferringtothestriatumandglobus pal- groupintheamygdalaresponds tosensations thatsignaldanger.Itcanreactbyactivatingau-
lidus alone. tonomicandendocrinecenters,suchas the'fightorflight' mechanisms.Mostofthesecircuits
arecloselyinterconnectedwiththehypothalamus.Fearandstress cangenerateverypowerful,
unconscious emotionalmemories throughtheamygdala.Theseunconscious fears arevery
difficulttosuppress orerase.
Anothermajorroleoftheamygdalais its controlofhierarchicalbehavior(peckingorder)in
vertebrates.Socialhierarchies arefundamentalinanimals thatbelongtolargegroups where
dominancebehaviors maintaintheeffectivestructureofthegroup.
Thereis acomplexrelationshipbetweentheamygdalaandaggressivebehavior,andthena-
tureof aggressivebehavioris oftenmisinterpreted.KonradLorenzarguedthatthestrongest
forms of aggressivebehavior arethosethatoccurbetweenmembers ofthesamespecies,usu-
allyrelatedtoattempts toestablishaplaceinahierarchy(Lorenz,2002).
Adiscreditedterm–'TheLimbicSystem'
Inmanytextbooks,asectiondealingwiththeamygdalaandrelatedstructures is titled'The
LimbicSystem.'Westronglyrecommendyouavoidusingthis termbecauseitcanbedefined
inmanydifferentandconfusingways.Theterm'limbic' has its originin'legrandlobelim-
bique' ofBroca.Brocawantedtodraw attentiontothecurvedbeltoftelencephalicstructures
thatborderthecentralparts oftheforebrain(thewordlimbicrefers toaborderland).This
originaldefinitionof the'limbiclobe' includedtheventralhippocampus,theamygdala,the
cingulategyrus,andthefornix.However,inthecontemporaryliterature,thelimbiclobeis of-
tensaidtoincludeallthevarious parts ofthehippocampalformation,theseptum,theolfac-
torytubercle,andthebednucleus ofthestriaterminalis,theamygdala,andthecingulate
gyrus.Differentauthors addor subtractstructures fromthedefinitioninwhatsometimes
seems tobearandommanner.Somegosofar as toincludethehypothalamus andparts ofthe
brainstem.Theirlogicis thatallstructures thatmightbeinvolvedinemotions orprimitivebe-
haviors shouldbelumpedtogetherunderthis title.Theresultis soconfusingthatwestrongly
recommendthatyouavoidusingtheterm'limbic' altogether.
Thesubcorticalwhitematter
Middleslicetoshowstriatum,pallidumandthalamus. Deeptothecerebralcortexis athicklayerof whitematter.Inconnectionalterms,theaxons in
thecerebralwhitematterareofthreetypes –associationfibers,commissuralfibers,andpro-
jectionfibers.Theassociationfibers runfromoneareaof thecortextoanotherareaofthecor-
Thestriatumcontains twoparts,thecaudatenucleus andtheputamen.Onthemedialsideof texwithinthesamehemisphere.Theymaybeshort(joiningthecortexofadjacentgyri,for
theputamenis thepallidum,representedchieflybytheglobus pallidus.Togetherthestriatum example)ormayformlongassociationbundles runningfromonelobetoanother.Thecom-
andpallidumformapowerfulmotor controlsystem,enablingthebraintochoosefroma'li- missuralfibers joincorticalareas of onehemispheretoequivalentareas ontheoppositeside.
brary' of inheritedstereotypedbehaviors accordingtotheneedatanymoment.Thestriatum Theprojectionfibers traveldownwards fromthecortextothestriatum,pallidum,dien-
receives asignificantinputfromthemotor cortex,and itinturnprojects totheglobus pal- cephalon,midbrain,hindbrain,andspinalcord,orupwards fromthethalamus tothecortex.
lidus.Theglobus pallidus totheventrolateralnucleus ofthethalamus andthecircuitis com-
pletedbytheprojectionofthis nucleus tothemotorcortex.Anotherimportantinputconnec-
Forebraincommissures
tionof thestriatumis thedopaminergicpathwaythatarises fromthesubstantianigra.Damage
Therearefourcommissures intheforebrain,thelargestof whichis thecorpus callosum,
tothis dopaminergicprojectionis theunderlyingcauseofParkinson's disease.
whichconnects theneocorticalareas ofthetwosides.Thehippocampalcommissure(fornix
Aless well-knownpartofthestriatumis theaccumbens nucleus,whichlies ventraltotheros-
commissure)connects therightandlefthippocampalregions.Theanteriorcommissurecon-
tralparts ofthecaudateand putamen.Theaccumbens nucleus alsoreceives adopaminergic
nects areas ofthetemporallobes,includingsomeolfactoryareas.Thesmallposteriorcom-
projectionfromthebrainstem,butinthis case,itcomes fromtheventraltegmentalarea,
missureis locatedinthepretectalareaofthediencephalon,adjacenttothemidbrain.
whichis medialtothesubstantianigra.Thedopaminergicprojectiontotheaccumbens forms
Thecorpus callosum lies under thecingulategyrus,abovetheseptum,andthelateralventri-
thebasis ofaninternalrewardsysteminthebrain.
cle.Therostralendis calledthegenu,thecentralpartis calledthebody,andthethickened
caudalendis calledthesplenium.Theventraltipofthegenuforms therostrumofthecorpus
51 52

callosum.Inmostcases,fibers crossinginthecorpus callosumconnectsymmetricalparts of The Broadmann areas of the cortex
thecortex.Thefibers crossinginthegenuof thecorpus callosumreachthetipofthefrontal
lobeinaU-shapedformationcalledtheforceps minor.Similarly,thefibers crossinginthe
spleniumreachthetipoftheoccipitallobeinalargerU-shapedformationcalledtheforceps Anumber ofanatomicallydistinctareas canberecognizedinthehumanneocortex.Many
major. modernstudies estimatethattheremaybeabout180anatomicallyandfunctionallydistinctar-
Thehippocampalcommissure(alsocalledthefornixcommissure) is locatedventraltothe eas inthehumanneocortex.
corpus callosum.
Theanteriorcommissureis locatedattherostralendofthediencephaloninfrontofthean- Therehavebeenseveralattempts overthepast150years todefinethemajorhumancortical
terior columns ofthefornix.Theanterior commissureis averyusefullandmarkinthestudy areas.Themostinfluentialis Brodmann's.
ofsections oftheforebrain:itlies attherostralendofthediencephalonatthelevelwherethe In1910,Brodmannpublishedanumberedlistof about50differentareas basedonhistologi-
interventricularforamenconnects thelateralventricletothethirdventricle.Thepreopticarea caldifferences.This numberingsystemis stillwidelyusedtoday.
is ventraltotheanteriorcommissure,whichis themostventralpartofthesubpallium,and ThemostrecognizedBrodmannareas arethefollowing:
caudaltothepreopticareais therostralendof thehypothalamus.Theanteriorcommissureis
alsoagoodmarkerfortherostralendofthehippocampus andtheamygdalainhumanbrain - area4–primarymotorcortex(M1)-locatedintheprecentralgyrus
slices. - areas 9and10–theprefrontalcortex–locatedrostraltotheprimarymotorcortex
Theposteriorcommissureis foundinthecaudalpretectalarea.Itlinks togetheranumberof - areas 3,1,and2–primarysomatosensorycortex(S1)-locatedinthepost-central
pretectalnucleiinvolvedin eyereflexes.Inthepast,theposteriorcommissurewas oftenmis- gyrus
takenlythoughttobelongtothemidbrain,butgeneexpressionproves itlies inthecaudaldi- - area41–primaryauditorycortex(A1) –locatedontheuppersurfaceofthesuperior
encephalon. temporalgyrus,mainlyinsidethelateralfissure
- area17–primaryvisualcortex(V1)–locatedonthemedialsurfaceoftheoccipital
lobeintheupper andlowerbanks ofthecalcarinesulcus
Questions forrepetition - areas 45and44-Broca's area(motorspeecharea)–locatedinthetriangularandoper-
cular parts oftheinferiorfrontalgyrus,immediatelyrostraltotheinferiorpartofthe
precentralgyrus inthedominanthemisphere
- Of whatdoes thetelencephalonconsistof? - areas 39and40–Wernicke's area(speechcomprehensionarea) –locatedontheupper
- Whatdoes thepalliumcomprise? surfaceofthesuperiortemporalgyrus caudaltotheprimaryauditorycortexinthe
- Whatenables thehumanbraintoundergomassiveexpansion? dominanthemisphere.MostofWernicke' areais insidethelateralfissure.
- Whatseparates theprimarymotorandtheprimarysensoryareas?
- Whatlayers makeuptheneocortex?
- Whichpartofthestriatumis involvedintherewardsystem?
- Inwhichfunctions is theamygdalainvolved?
- Whattypes ofwhitemattertracks canbedistinguished?
OverviewofimportantBroadmann areas.
53 54

MOTOR SYSTEMS
Motor systems
Questions forrepetition
Thenervous systemcanrespondtoexternalchallenges throughmusclecontraction,internal
- How many,functionallydifferentneocorticalareas areassumednowadays? adjustments toheartrateandbreathing,andsecretionofhormones inresponsetostress and
- WhichBroadmannareas areincludedinBroca's area? otherbodilyrequirements.
- Inwhichfunctions areBroadmannareas 39and40involved?
Controlofskeletalmuscles
Theskeletalmuscles areundervoluntarycontrolmostofthetime.However,insomecases,
thecontractionofthesemuscles is intheformofareflex,suchas whenweburnourfingers in
aflame.Reflexes arefasterthanthetypicalsystemofconscious control.
Inhumans,thecentralareaforthecontroloftheskeletalmuscles starts is theprimarymotor
areaofthecerebralcortex,whichis locatedintheprecentralgyrus ofthefrontallobe.Electri-
calstimulationofthemotorcortexproduces contractionofmuscles ontheoppositesideof
thebody.Thebodyparts arerepresentedupsidedownontheprecentralgyrus,withthehead
atthebottom,andthelower limbatthetop,withthemuscles ofthelegandfoot,represented
ontheextensionofthemotorcortexontothemedialsurfaceof thehemisphere.
Thesomatotopicpattern ofcontrolofmuscles in theprimarymotor cortex.Notethatthe
areas for controlofthelegandfootmuscles areon themedialsideofthecortex.
Themotorcortexis connectedtothemotorneurons ofthespinalcordbyalongpathway
calledthecorticospinaltract.Thecorticospinaltractarises fromlargepyramidalcells inthe
motorcortex.Their axons travelthroughtheinternalcapsule,cerebralpeduncle,thebasilar
pons,andthemedullarypyramidtoreachthecaudalendofthehindbrain.Atthis point,most
ofthecorticospinalfibers cross totheoppositesideinthepyramidaldecussation.Duetothat,
theymakeconnections withmotor neurons ontheoppositesideof thebodyfromtheircorti-
calorigin.
Becausethecorticospinalfiberbundles formthemedullarypyramids,thecorticospinaltract
has traditionallybeencalledthepyramidaltract.This termis insomeways unfortunatebe-
cause,bycoincidence,thecells of originofthecorticospinaltractarepyramid-shapedneu-
rons inthemotorcortex.Anotherreasontoavoidusingthetermpyramidaltractis theunfor-
55 56

tunateandnow discredited'pyramidal/extrapyramidal' concept,whichwas anearlybutmisin- tractinhumans,othernearbyareas,suchas thestriatum,arealsodamaged.Becauseofthis,
formedattempttoexplaintheorganizationofdifferentparts ofthemotorsystems. theloss offinemovementis accompaniedbyhypertonia(stiffness orspasticity)andhyper-
reflexiarelatedtostriataldamage.
Theconceptofan extrapyramidalsystembecamepopular amongneurologists inthe
early20thcentury,whoweretryingtodistinguishthemotor problems arisingfrom Theroleofnon-corticalmotorcenters –modules formotorcontrol
damagetothepyramidal(corticospinal) tractfrom other motor syndromes.Theycon- Weplanmovements conceptually,thinkinginsequences andoutcomes ratherthanjointan-
trastedthedirect(monosynaptic) projectionofthecortextomotoneurons (thepyrami- gles andcontractionofindividualmuscles.Thebraintranslates high-levelactionplans into
dalsystem)withwhattheybelievedtobeanalternativemultisynapticpathwayfrom modularsystems tomanagethecontrolofdozens of muscles neededtocarryoutaparticular
cortextomotoneurons,whichtheycalledtheextrapyramidalsystem.Theyhypothe- tasktomakethis process moreefficient.Thesemodularcontrolsystems arefoundinthebrain
sizedthatthis multisynapticpathwaywentfrom cortextostriatum andpallidum,then stemandspinalcord.Thesemodules arepre-wiredduringbraindevelopmenttoproduce
tovarious midbrainandhindbraincenters,andfinallytothespinalcord.Theproblem semi-automaticmovements likewalkingandchewing.This makes iteasierforthemotorcor-
is thatthehypothesizedchainofdescendingconnections does notexist.Itwas fa- textogetaresultwithouttheneedtoconnecttoindividualmotorneurons.Duringvertebrate
mouslydebunkedin1962byNautaandMehler.Theyshowedthattheglobus pallidus evolution,complexbehaviors andmovementsets becameorganizedinahierarchyofmod-
projects almostentirelytothethalamus rather thantothemidbrainandthehindbrain ules.Atthetopofthehierarchyaresurvivalbehaviors -eatinganddrinkingbehaviors,defen-
motor centers.Despitethis,the'extrapyramidal'conceptlives onintextbooks andin sivebehaviors,reproductivebehaviors,andmovementpatterns toexploretheimmediateenvi-
lectures givenbyneurologists. ronment.Themostimportantcenters forthecontrolofsurvivalbehaviors arelocatedinthe
hypothalamus.
Brainstemandspinalcordmodules forcontrolof complexmovements
Eachhypothalamicbehavioralorganizerconnects withmovementmodules inthebrainstem
andspinalcord.Forexample,feedingmayinvolveturningtheheadtolookaround,running
toafoodsource,reachingandgrasping,andlickingandchewing.Eachoftheseactivities is
sequencedbyaparticularpartof themidbrain,hindbrain,orspinalcord.Thehypothalamus
activates anumberofthesemovementmodules inacoordinatedprogramtoachievethede-
siredbehavior.Thebrainstemoffers modules fororientingmovements oftheheadandneck,
licking,chewing,facialexpression,vocalization,andcontrolofbreathing.Themovement
modules inthespinalcordincludethosethatcontrolposture,locomotion,reaching,and
grasping.
Anexampleofmodularcontrolatthespinalcordlevelis thewithdrawalofthelowerlimb
fromasharppaininthefoot,suchas standingonapieceofbrokenglass.Interneurongroups
ofthespinalcordentirelyhandlethis complexresponse,andthewithdrawalmovementoc-
curs beforethepainis evenregisteredinthecerebralcortex.Theprimaryresponseis topull
thefootawayfromthesourceofthepain,requiringcontractionofhipflexors (psoas andilia-
cus)andkneeflexors (hamstrings) whileinhibitingthecorrespondingextensors topermitthe
movement.Theproblemwiththis responseis thatitwillalsocauseafallunless adjustments
aremade.Themoduletakes careofthis bycontractinghipextensors,hipabductors,andknee
extensors oftheoppositelegtostabilizethebody.Inthis way,tenormoremuscles ineachleg
areeithercontractedormadetorelaxinordertoachievethewholepatternofmovement
neededtoterminateapainfulstimulus.
Thecourseofthecorticospinaltractfromthemotor cortextothespinalcord.
Damagetothecorticospinaltract
Humans whoexperienceddamagetothemotor cortex orthecorticospinaltractcannotper-
formtasks thatrequireprecisemovements of individualfingers,suchas writing,sewing,tying
knots,andpickingupsmallobjects.Less precisemovements,andthosethatinvolvelarger
musclegroups,areless severelyaffected.Whenacerebralstrokedamages thecorticospinal
57 58

Reflexactions followinga painfulinjurytotherightfoot.On theright-handside,theflexor
muscles pullthefootawayfromthepainfulstimulus,andtheextensors areinhibited.On
theleftside,theextensor muscles areactivatedtomaintain stability.
Descendingmotorcontrolpathways other thanthecorticospinaltract
As wellas sendingfibers tothespinalcordinthecorticospinaltract,themotorcortexsends
axons tothebasilarpons (corticopontinefibers)andthebrainstem(corticobulbarfibers)in Arostralcoronalsliceshowingthecaudate(Cd),putamen (Pu),andaccumbens (Acb).
ordertoconnectwiththecerebellumandbrainstemmotorcenters.Severalcenters inthe
brainstemgiverisetodescendingtracts thatendintheinterneuronpools oftheintermediate
spinalgraymatter.Thesearetherubrospinal,tectospinal,reticulospinal,andvestibulospinal
tracts,eachcontrollingdifferentaspects ofmovement.
Theroles ofthestriatumandpalliduminmotor control
Thestriatumandthepallidumarelargemasses of graymatterthatliedeeptothecerebralcor-
tex.Thestriatumconsists ofthreeparts –thecaudatenucleus,theputamen,andtheaccum-
bens nucleus.Medialtotheputameninthemainpartofthepallidum,calledtheglobus pal-
lidus.Theglobus pallidus is separatedfromthethalamus bytheinternalcapsule.
Theaccumbens nucleus lies deeptotherostralparts ofthecaudatenucleus andputamen.
Thestriatalandpallidalcenters havealongevolutionaryhistoryandcanbeclearlyidentified
inreptiles andbirds.Thestriatumandpallidumarepartofamajorforebraincircuitofcon-
nections,regulatingtheformandstyleof movements.
This circuitbegins withneurons inthemotor cortex,projectingtocells inthestriatum.Stri-
atalneurons projecttothepallidum.Thepallidumprojects tothemidbrainandthethalamus.
Thethalamicnucleus involvedthenprojects backtothecerebralcortex,alteringmovements
intheplanningstageorwhiletheyareinprogress.Thesubstantianigrais intimatelycon-
nectedwiththestriatumthroughthedopaminergicnigrostriatalpathway.
Acoronalslicethrough themiddleof thecerebrumshowingthecaudatenucleus (Cd),
putamen (Pu),andglobus pallidus (GP)andtheir relationshiptotheinternalcapsule(ic)
andthalamus (Th).
59 60

Theresultis majordisorders ofmuscletone(oftencalledspasticity) andavarietyofinvolun-
tarymovements.
Thefinalcommonpathwayforallmotorsystems –themotorneuron
Allmotorcontrolsystems actthroughthemotor neurons:thefinalpathwaytomuscles.Large
(alpha)motorneurons intheventralhornof thespinalcordactivatetheskeletalmuscles of
thelimbs andtrunk.Similaralphamotorneurons inthemidbrainandhindbrainactivatethe
voluntarymuscles ofthehead.Eachalphamotor neuronis connectedtomanyfibers ina
skeletalmuscle.Whenthealphamotor neuronfires,allof thefibers towhichitis connected
willcontract.Themotorunitis thecombinationofasinglealphamotor neuronandthemus-
clefibers towhichitconnects.Activatingalphamotorneurons is theonlywaytocauseskele-
talmusclefibers tocontract.As aresult,allthemotorcontrolsystems describedabove
achievetheir effects bystimulatingorsuppressingalphamotorneurons.TheEnglishphysiol-
ogistandNobelprizewinner,Charles Sherrington,coinedtheterm' finalcommonpathway' to
describetheroleof alphamotorneurons.
Questions forrepetition
- Of whatparts does thestriatumconsistof?
- Describethecourseof thecorticospinaltract.
- Whathappens whenthecorticospinaltractis damaged?
- How is theglobus pallidus separatedfromthethalamus?
- How is thesubstantianigraconnectedtothestriatum?
Theconnection circuitstartingfromexcitatoryglutamateneurons in theprimarymotor
cortex(GLU).ThecorticalGLU neurons projecttoGABAneurons in thestriatum.The
GABAstriatalneurons in turn projecttoGABAneurons in thepallidum.Thecircuitis
completedbytheprojection of thepallidalneurons tothethalamus andthethalamicGABA
projection backtothecortex.
This setofconnections underlies theproductionofpredeterminedmovementpatterns.Many
species areknowntohavecomplexpatterns of movementassociatedwithmatingandordis-
plays ofaggression.Itseems possiblethatthestriatal/pallidalcomplexis themaincenterfor
theinitiationofthesegeneticallydeterminedmovementpatterns.
Aninterestingfeatureofthecells of thestriatumandpallidumis thattheyinfluencethecortex
byinhibitingthalamicneurons usingtheinhibitoryneurotransmitterGABA.This makes them
verydifferentfromthecorticalneurons thatconnecttothestriatum;thesecorticalneurons re-
leasetheexcitatorytransmitter substanceglutamate.
Wedonothaveaclearideaofthepreciseroleof thestriatumandpalliduminhumans,butwe
dohaveclues fromcases inwhichtheseareas aredamaged.Thefindings aredisorders ofthe
restingtoneofmuscles,difficultystartingmovements,andunwantedinvoluntarymovements.
InParkinson's disease,theinputtothestriatumfromthesubstantianigrais damaged.There-
sultis amassiveanddisablingincreaseinmuscletone,accompaniedbytremorinthehands,
andgreatdifficultyinstartingmovements.Asevereformofdamagetothestriatumis seenin
late-stageHuntington's disease,wheretheface,trunk,andlimbs writhecontinuously.Inthe
caseofcerebralpalsy,thestriatumandpallidumarelikelydamagedinthebabybeforebirth.
61 62

SENSORY SYSTEM Dorsal column-medial lemniscus pathway
This is themaintouchpathway.Ittransmits signals fromlow-thresholdmechanoreceptors in
theskin,muscles,andjoints.This enables tactilediscrimination,vibrationdetection,and
The somatosory system
proprioception(senseofpositionfromjointandmusclereceptors).
Themaintouchpathway's first-order(primary)neurons arelocatedinthedorsalrootganglia.
Somaticsensations comefromtheskin,muscles,joints,andbones.Somaticsensations from
Theaxons oftheganglioncells carryinginformationfromthelower limbs formthegracile
theheadtraveltothebrain steminthetrigeminalnerve,whereas thosebelow theheadtravel
fasciculus,whileintheupperextremities,theyformthecuneatefasciculus.Thetwofasciculi
inspinalnerves tothespinalcord.Somaticsensations fromtheskinaretouch,deeppressure,
arecollectivelyknownas thedorsalcolumns.
pain,andtemperature.
Thedorsalcolumnaxons ascendtothehindbrain,wheretheyterminateinthegracileand
cuneatenuclei.Theaxons leavingthecells ofthegracileandcuneatenucleicross themidline
Somatosensory pathways in the spinal cord
andformacompactbundlecalledthemediallemniscus.Themediallemniscus ascends
Boththespinothalamictracts andthedorsalcolumns (gracileandcuneatefasciculi)convey
throughthebrainstemtosynapsewiththird-order neurons intheventroposteriornucleus of
somatosensoryinformationfromonesideof thebodytothecerebralcortexoftheopposite
thethalamus.Thethalamicneurons sendtheiraxons totheprimarysomatosensorycortexin
sideviathethalamus.Eachofthesesystems is basicallyachainofthreeneurons:thefirst
thepostcentralgyrus.
neuronis adorsalrootganglioncellwithits centralprocess enteringthespinalcordtoascend
forsomedistancebeforeitsynapses withthesecondneuroninthechain;theaxonofthesec-
Spinothalamic tracts
ondneuroncrosses themidlineimmediatelyandascends tothethalamus;thethirdneuron
Therearetwospinothalamictracts,lateralandventral.Informationaboutpain
sends its axonfromthethalamus tothecerebralcortex.
andtemperatureis conveyedbythelateralspinothalamictract,whiletheventral
Thepainandtemperature-sensitivefibers (spinothalamictract)cross themidlineafew seg-
spinothalamictractconveys touchsensation.Thefirst-orderneurons ofthespinothalamicsys-
ments abovethelevelatwhichtheyenter thespinalcord.Incontrast,finetouchandproprio-
temarelocatedinthespinalganglia.Theaxons of theseganglioncells enterthespinalcord
ceptionfibers (dorsalcolumn-mediallemniscus pathway)donotcross untiltheyreachthe
andascendforafew segments beforetheysynapsewithsecond-orderneurons inthesubstan-
hindbrain.
tiagelatinosaofthedorsalhorn.Theaxons ofthesecond-orderneurons cross themidlinein
theanterior whitecommissureofthespinalcordtoformthespinothalamictracts.Thecrossed
painandtemperatureneurons formthelateralspinothalamictractinthelateralcolumnofthe
spinalcord.Incontrast,thecrossedtouchneurons formtheventralspinothalamictractinthe
ventralcolumnofthespinalcord.
Thespinothalamictracts ascendalongthespinallengthandthentravelthroughthebrainstem
untiltheyreachthethalamus.Inthethalamus,theysynapsewiththird-orderneurons inthe
ventroposteriornucleus.Theaxons oftheventroposteriorthalamicneurons traveltothesoma-
tosensorycortex.
The cranial somatosensory system
Almostallcranialsomatosensoryfibers intheheadtravelinthetrigeminalnerve.Thefirst-
ordertrigeminalsensoryneurons arelocatedinthetrigeminalganglionintheskullbase.The
trigeminalganglionaxons enterthehindbrainthroughthesideofthebasilarpons.Someof
thesefibers synapseintheprincipaltrigeminalsensorynucleus,whichlies atthelevelof
entryof thetrigeminalnerve.However,manyof thefibers descendinthehindbrainforcon-
siderabledistances beforetheymakecontactwithsecond-orderneurons.Someofthedes-
cendingfibers travelas faras uppercervicalsegments beforetheysynapse.
Thedescendingtrigeminalfibers formthespinaltrigeminaltract,andthetrigeminalnuclear
groups caudaltotheprincipalnucleus arecalledthenucleus ofthespinaltrigeminaltract.
Trigeminalfibers carryingtouchsensationsynapseintheprincipalsensorynucleus andthe
rostralpartofthespinaltrigeminalnucleus.Whereas thosecarryingpainandtemperaturesen-
sationsynapseinthecaudalpartof thespinaltrigeminalnucleus.
Theaxons oftheneurons oftheprincipalsensorynucleus andthespinaltrigeminalnucleus
cross themidlineandascendtothemedialpartoftheventroposteriornucleus thalamus.The
Thespinalsomatosensorypathways.Touch anddeep pressuresensations arecarriedin the ventroposteriornucleus sends its axons totheinferiorhalfofthepostcentralgyrus.
dorsalcolumn-medicallemniscus system.Pain andtemperaturesensations arecarriedin
thespinothalamicsystem. The primary somatosensory cortex
Theprimarysomatosensorycortexis locatedinthepostcentralgyrus,inBrodmannareas 3,1,
Thedorsalcolumntracts carrytouch,deeppressure,proprioceptive,andvibrationsenseinfor- and2.Thesomatosensoryinformationreachingthepostcentralgyrus is topicallyorganized.
mationinthegracileandcuneatefasciculi-thegracilefasciculus mainlyconveys information Eachindividualregionofthebodyis representedinaseparateareaonthegyrus,withthe
fromthehindlimb.Thecuneatefasciculus conveys informationfromtheforelimb. headatthebottomandthelower limbatthetop.
63 64

The visual system
Theeyecollects visualinformationtosendtothebrain.Beforereachingtheretina,light
passes throughthecornea, aqueous humor,lens,andvitreous humor.Visualimages arefo-
cusedbythecorneaandlens beforetheyreachtheretina.Theretinais enclosedinathick
fibrous layercalledthesclera.
Theprimarysomatosensorycortex(S1),which lies in thepostcentralgyrus.
Adiagramoftheeye.
Thelightreceptorcells oftheretina,therods andcones,lieinthedeepestlayeroftheretina,
solightmustpass throughthesurfacelayers oftheretinabeforeitreaches thereceptors.
Thehumanretinais intheformofadeepcup.Its outlinerepresents aboutthree-quarters ofa
spherewithadiameterof22mm.Thehumanretinacontains about7millionconecells and
about700millionrodcells.Theconecells areconcentratedinacentralareacalledthemac-
ula.Theyareresponsibleforhighacuityandcolorvision.Thereareveryfew rodcells inthe
macula.Cones aresensitivetobrightlightandfallintothreecategories thatrespondtolight
inthespectrum's red,green,or blueparts.Therodcells donotdiscriminatebetweencolors.
Instead,theyaresensitivetodimlightandreactquicklytomovingobjects enteringthevisual
field.
Justmedialtothemaculais anareawheretheaxons leavetheretinaformingtheopticnerve.
Therearenophotoreceptors inthis area,soitcreates ablindspotontheretina,about1.5-2.0
mmindiameter.
The retinal cell layers
Thecells oftheretinaarearrangedindistinctlayers,themostprominentofwhicharethe
photoreceptorlayer,thebipolarlayer,andtheganglioncelllayer.As notedabove,the
photoreceptorlayeris thedeepestlayeroftheretina–furthestfromtheentrypathoflightrays.
Thesomatotopicallyorganizedrepresentation ofbodysensations on thepostcentralgyrus.
Thereceptorcells inthis layeraretherods andcones.Thelight-sensitiveprocesses ofthe
rods arepartlyembeddedinthepigmentedepitheliallayer.Superficialtothephotoreceptor
layer is thebipolarlayer.Thebipolar cells receiveinformationfromphotoreceptors andsend
signals toganglioncells.Amacrinecells andhorizontalcells arealsolocatedinthebipolar
Questions for repetition
layer.Thefunctionoftheamacrineandhorizontalcells is tomodulatethesignals reachingthe
bipolarcells.Theganglioncelllayer lies onthesuperficialsurfaceoftheretina.Ganglion
- What information is summarised as the somatosensory system?
cells arethelargestcells in theretinabecausetheyhavelongaxons thattraveltothebrainin
- How many neurons make up most somatosensory pathways?
theopticnerve.Theganglioncellaxons intheopticnervereachcenters inthehypothalamus
- Where do the fibers that transmit information about temperature cross?
(thesuprachiasmaticnucleus),thalamus (thelateralgeniculatenucleus),andthesuperiorcol-
- How is touch sensation transmitted from the face?
liculus ofthemidbrain.
- Which Broadmann areas does the primary somatosensory cortex com-
prise?
65 66

Thelayers oftheretina.On theleftis aphotomicrograph ofasection through theretina
with theganglion celllayer aboveandthephotoreceptor layer below.Adiagramshowing
theconnections between photoreceptors,bipolar cells,andganglion cells is on theright.
Theintrinsicnetworks oftheretinaarecapableofsignificantsignalprocessingandconsolida-
tionof information.Forexample,ganglioncells ontheedges oftheretinareceiveinformation
Adiagramshowingtherepresentation ofthevisualfields on theretina,thelateralgenicu-
fromahundredormorerodcells,thus increasingsensitivitytodimlight.Bycontrast,gan-
late,andthevisualcortex.Theoveralleffectis thattherighthalfofthevisualfieldis rep-
glioncells inthemaculaofahumanretinareceiveinputfromonlytwoorthreecones,en-
resentedin thevisualcortexandviceversa.
ablingtheretinatoresolvefinedetail.
The organization of the projection from the retina to the brain
Questions for repetition
Theganglioncellaxons fromeachofthetwohalves oftheretinaprojecttodifferentsides of
thebrain.Theaxons fromthemedial(nasal) half cross themidlinetoprojecttotheopposite
- Describethepathoflightthroughtheeye.
sideofthebrain,whereas theaxons fromthelateral(temporal)halfprojecttothesamesideof
- Whatis thecharacteristicstimulus forarod?
thebrain.
- Whatcauses theblindspot?
Becauselightreaches theretinathroughabiconvexlens,theimagereachingtheretinais re-
- Of whatlayers does theretinaconsistof?
versed.This means thatthelightreceivedfromthetemporalhalfofthevisualfieldfalls upon
- Whatis theanatomicalstructureofthevisualpathway?
thenasalparts ofeachretinaandviceversa.Theimagefromeachtemporalvisualfield(nasal
retina)crosses inthechiasmtocontinuetoreachthethalamus andcortexontheoppositeside
ofthebrain.Theimagefromeachnasalvisualfield(temporalretina)remains uncrossedand
continues toreachthethalamus andcortexof thesamesideas theretina.Theoutcomeis that
theleft-handsides ofthevisualfields of botheyes runintherightoptictract,andtheright-
handsides ofthevisualfields of botheyes runtogetherintheleftoptictract.Theoverallres-
ultis thateachvisualcortexreceives informationfromtheoppositeside's visualfields.In
otherwords,therightsideof theretinaof botheyes (temporalretinaoftherighteyeandnasal
retinaof thelefteye)projects totherightvisualcortex,andviceversa.
67 68

The auditory system
Theearcollects soundinformationtosendtothebrainviathevestibulocochlearnerve.
Theearconsists ofthreeparts:theexternalearconsistingofthepinna,theauditorycanal,and
thetympanicmembrane(eardrum);themiddleear,whichcontains thethreeauditoryossicles;
theinnerear, whichcontains thecochlea.
Insidethecochleaareneuronalreceptors groupedin astructurecalledtheorgan ofCorti.
Thecochleacontains threefluid-filledtubes,anditis themiddleoneofthese,thescalame-
dia,which houses theorgan ofCorti.Hair cells in theorgan ofCortidetectsoundvibra-
tions,andtheinformation is transmittedtothehindbrain bytheauditory(cochlear)nerve.
Thecellbodies of thecochlear nervefibers arelocatedin thespiralganglion,which is em-
beddedin thebonystructureof thecochlea.
Thecellbodies oftheauditoryreceptor neurons,whichareconnectedtotheorganofCorti,
arelocatedinthespiralganglion,whichis inthecenterofthecochlea.Eachspiralganglion
cellhas anincomingaxonprocess connectedtotheorganofCortiandanoutgoingaxonpro-
cess thattravels intheauditorynervetothebrainstem.
Soundenters theexternalear through theauditorycanalandcauses thetympanicmem-
Theauditorynerveaxons terminateinthecochlearnucleiinthehindbrain.Thecochlearnuc-
branetovibrate.This vibration is transmittedacross themiddleear bythreetinybones,the
leiprojecttothesuperiorolivarycomplex.Fromthere,theauditoryinformationis senttothe
malleus,incus,andstapes.Thestapes transmits thevibration tofluidin theinternalear,
inferiorcolliculus ofthemidbrain,whereitis furtherprocessedbeforebeingsenttotheme-
andthesevibrations eventuallyreach thecochlea.Thecochleais abonyshellthatcontains
dialgeniculatenucleus inthethalamus.Themedialgeniculateprojects totheprimaryaudit-
thesoundreceptors.Notethatthemiddleear is connectedtothebackofthethroatbyan
orycortex(A1)ontheuppersurfaceofthesuperior temporalgyrus.Theauditorypathway
air-filledcanalcalledtheEustachian tube,or pharyngotympanictube.
faithfullymaintains thefrequencymapfromthecochleatothecortexsothattheauditoryrep-
resentationthatreaches theprimaryauditorycortexis stilltonotopicallyorganized.
Thethreeauditoryossicles arenamedthemalleus,incus,andstapes.Theyformasetoflevers
Thebrainstemauditorycenters of bothsides areinterconnectedacross themidline.This bilat-
thatmechanicallytransmits soundfromthetympanicmembranetotheovalwindow ofthein-
eralnetworkallows thebraintoworkoutthepositionofanincomingsound.Becauseofthese
ner ear.Soundwaves reach theinnerear thenreachreceptorhaircells inthecochlea.The
interconnections betweenthebrainstemauditorynuclei,theprimaryauditorycortexreceives
cochleais abonycaseshapedlikeaspiralseashell.Itcontains theauditoryreceptorcells,
informationfrombothears.
whichconvertsoundinformationintonerveimpulses.
Insidethecochleararethreespiraltubes,thescalavestibuli,thescalamedia,andthescala
tympani.Eachofthesethreetubes is filledwithfluid.Thescalamediacontains theauditory
receptor apparatus (theorganof Corti),whichsits onthebasilarmembrane.Theouterhair
cells oftheorganofCortiarethereceptor cells thatareconnectedtosensoryaxons.
Theorganof Cortiis tonotopicallyorganized.Thehaircells respondtodifferentsoundfre-
quencies accordingtotheirpositioninthecochlea.Thehaircells atthebaseofthecochleare-
spondtohighfrequencies,andthehair cells attheapexofthecochlearespondtolow fre-
quencies.
69 70

The vestibular system
Thename'vestibular' comes fromthevestibule,whichis asmallbonyspaceintheinnerear
inwhichthevestibularreceptors arelocated.Thevestibuleis nexttothecochlea,andthetwo
structures together arehousedinthebonylabyrinthof theinnerear.
Themainfunctions ofthevestibular systemaretomaintainbalanceandcoordinateeye
movementwiththeheadandbodyposition.Thesefunctions aremanagedatareflexlevel,
with
constantadjustments beingmadetoposturalmuscles andeyemovement.Inputfromthe
vestibularsystemenables theeyes totrackanobjectofinterest,evenwhenthebodymoves
unpredictably.Eyemovementcoordinationuses anetworkthatinterconnects thevestibular
systemwiththevisualsystem,thecerebellum,thespinalcord,andthemotorneurons that
controltheeyemuscles.
As wellas controllingthis complexreflexnetwork,thevestibular systemsupplies information
tothecerebralcortexaboutthebody's positioninspace.This helps togiveus aconscious ap-
preciationof thepositionofthebodyinspace.Thesomatosensorysystemalsoprovides vital
informationonbodypositionthatcontributes toourabilitytomaintainpostureandbalance.
Someofthepositionsenseinformationfromthesomatosensorysystemcomes fromtouchre-
ceptors intheskinanddeeppressurereceptors inthefeet.
The semicircular canals
Thevestibulecontains twoquiteseparatesystems forgatheringinformationonheadposition.
Onesystem,basedonthesemicircularcanals,detects movementof theheadinanydirection.
Incontrast,theothersystem,basedonthesacculeandutriclesystem,is designedtoregister
thepositionoftheheadwhenitis notmoving.Therefore,thesemicircularcanalsystemcan
bedescribedas thedynamicvestibularsystem,andthesaccule/utriclesystemcanbede-
scribedas thestaticvestibularsystem.
Theauditorypathwayfromthecochleatotheprimaryauditorycortex(A1).
Ganglion cells in thespiralganglion receiveinformation fromtheorgan ofCorti,andthis
information is transmittedcentrallytothecochlear nuclei.Each cochlear nucleus is con-
nectedtoneurons in thesuperior olivarynucleiofboth sides.Thesuperior olivarynuclei
sendaxons totheinferior colliculus ofthemidbrain,which is in turn connectedtotheme-
dialgeniculatenucleus ofthethalamus.Thegeniculatemedicalprojects totheprimary
auditorycortex
Questions for repetition
- How is theinnerearstructured?
- Inwhichanatomicalstructurearethesensoryreceptors forthe"soundwaves" embedded?
- Whatis theanatomicalstructureoftheauditorypathway?
- Whichthalamicnucleus is involvedintheauditorypathway?
Overviewofthevestibular system.
71 72

Semicircular canals
Thesemicircularcanals arethreealmostcircular tubes containingafluidcalledendolymph.
Endolymphis alsofoundin thecochlearductincontactwithauditoryhaircells.Eachsemi-
circularcanalis placedinadifferentspatialplane–onehorizontal,oneverticalclosetothe
sagittalplane,andoneverticalclosetothecoronalplane.Nomatterwhatdirectionthehead
moves in,itwillcausefluidtomovearoundinoneor moreofthethreecanals.Eachcanalhas
awidenedareacalledtheampulla,whichcontains sensitivehaircells.Theprocesses ofthe
haircells areembeddedin apieceof jellycalledthecupula.Whenthefluidmoves inresponse
toheadmotion,thecupulais draggedinthedirectionoffluidmovement,twistingthepro-
cesses ofthehaircells.Thetwistinggenerates anelectricalsignal,whichis carriedtothe
hindbrainbythevestibularnerve.
Schematicoverviewof thevestibular pathways.
Saccule and utricle
Thesaccule-utriclesystemis containedinapair ofrecesses inthevestibule.Thesacculeand
utricleeachhaveapatchofhaircells calledamacula.Theprocesses ofthesehaircells are
embeddedinaplateofjelly,as arethoseofthesemicircularcanals,butinthis case,thejelly
contains calciumcarbonatecrystals calledotoliths.Thecalcium-containingjellyplateis
calledtheotolithmembrane.Whentheheadis stationary,theweightofthecalcium-filledoto-
liths pulls thehair cells undertheinfluenceofgravity,andthis,inturn,causes thehaircells to
bestimulated.Otherexternalforces suchas rapidaccelerationcanalsostimulatethehaircells
inthemacula.Thereceptorclusters ofthesacculeandutriclearesetatrightangles toeach
othersothattheycanestablishthehead's positionatalltimes.Themaculaofthesacculeis set
Thehair cells ofeach semicircular canalarelocatedin theampulla.Theciliaofthehair intheverticalplane,soitis bestplacedtodetectflexionandextensionmovements ofthe
cells detectthemovementoftheendolymph.Theinformation gatheredbythehair cells is head.Themaculaoftheutricleis setinthehorizontalplane,soitis bestplacedtodetectlat-
gatheredbytheaxons ofthevestibular ganglion cells.Thevestibular ganglion cells areun- eraltiltingofthehead.Theinformationgatheredbythereceptors ofthesacculeandutricleis
usualin thattheyaretruebipolar ganglion cells,notpseudounipolar cells as in theso- carriedtothehindbrainbythevestibularnerve.
matosensoryandauditorysystems.Thecentralaxon ofthevestibular ganglion cellcon-
nects with thevestibular nucleiin thehindbrain.
73 74

Vestibular nuclei Olfaction
Thevestibularnucleiofthehindbrainoccupyalargeareainthefloorofthefourthventricle.
Theyarestronglyconnectedwiththecerebellum,thespinalcord,andwiththesystemthat Inmostmammals,thesenseofsmell(olfaction)plays acriticalroleinrecognizingpredators,
controls eyemovement.Thevestibularconnectiontotheneckandeyemuscles ensures that partners,andoffspring.Theolfactorysystemhas becomeless importantinhumans because
headandeyepositions areconstantlylinkedtogether.Themediallongitudinalfasciculus is werelyonahighlydevelopedvisualsystem.However,itis notoftenrealizedthatagreatdeal
thebrainstempathwaylinkingtheeyemusclenucleiandthevestibularnuclei.Thecloserela- ofwhatwecalltasteis actuallybasedonolfactorysignals.Whenwehaveanasalinfection,
tionshipbetweenthevestibular receptors andeyemovementcanbedemonstratedbyspinning andtheolfactoryreceptors areinjuredorblocked,weloseabout90%of ourabilitytoappre-
someonearound.Ifyousitsomeoneinarotatingofficechairandspinthemaroundtentimes ciateflavors.Inmanyanimals,olfactoryinputtotheamygdalacaninitiateemotionalre-
atamoderatespeed,thenstopthemabruptly,youwillseetheeyes flickfromsidetosideina sponses,includingaggression.
movementcallednystagmus.Theeyemovementhappens becausethefluidinthehorizontal Theolfactoryepitheliumof thenasalcavityconverts informationonodors intocodedneural
semicircularcanalis stillmovingwhenthechair stops moving,andtheeyemusclecontrol signals.Olfactoryreceptorneurons intheroofofthenosearesubjecttocontinualdamage,
systemthinks thattheheadis stillmoving.Itthereforeresponds withtheside-to-sidemove- andinrodents,theyhaveanaveragelifespanofonly40days.Becauseof
mentoftheeyes.Thesubjectwillalsocomplainthattheroomseems tobespinningaround this,theyhavetobeconstantlyreplenishedfromstemcells.Eacholfactoryreceptorneuron
them;this sensationis calledvertigo. sends anunmyelinatedaxonthroughholes intheethmoidboneintheroof ofthenoseto
Itis crucialtodistinguishthesensationof vertigofromdizziness.Dizziness is afeelingofun- reachtheolfactorybulb.
steadiness,whileinvertigo,theworldseems tobemovingaroundyou.Vertigois oftenac-
companiedbyfeelings ofnauseaandmaybeassociatedwithvomitinginseverecases.
Vestibulospinal tracts
Twoimportantdescendingtracts arisefromthevestibularnuclei–theuncrossedlateral
vestibulospinaltract,which reaches allspinalcordlevels,andthecrossedmedialvestibu-
lospinaltract,whichends inthecervicalspinalcord.Themedial
vestibulospinaltractis primarilyresponsivetoinputfromthesemicircularcanals,anditcon-
nects withtheneckmuscles tocontrolheadposition.Thelateralvestibulospinaltractis
mainlyresponsivetoinformationfromthesacculeandutricle;its primaryroleis toadjust
postureinthelimbs andtrunkbyactivatingextensormuscles tomaintainbalance.
Vestibular representation in the cerebral cortex
Whilethemainfunctionofthevestibularsystemis theautomaticcontrolof
bodyandeyeposition,thecerebralcortexreceives vestibularinformation
,whichcontributes toaconscious perceptionof bodyposition.Themain
areareceivingvestibularinformationinmonkeys is locatedbetweentheventral
partoftheprimarysomatosensorycortexandtheinsula.Itis assumedthat
anequivalentareaexists inhumans.Becausetheprimarysomatosensory
cortexis inthepostcentralgyrus of theparietallobe,this areais referredtoas
theparietal-insularvestibular cortex.Theinputtothis areais notexclusivelyvestibular;it
alsoreceives informationfromthevisualsystemandfromposition-sensereceptors inthe
neck.
Themain olfactoryprojection is diagrammaticallyshown on theleftofthepicture.Fibers
fromtheolfactorybulbtravelin theolfactorytracttoreach theprimaryolfactorycortex
Questions for repetition (piriformcortex),theentorhinalcortex,andpartof theamygdala.Therightsideofthedia-
gramshows theaccessoryolfactorypathway,which does notexistin humans butis an im-
- Whatarethetwosystems for determiningheadposition? portantstructurein manymammals.
- Whatarethedifferences betweenthesetwosystems?
- Whichbrainstempathwayconnects thecontroloftheeyemuscles andthevestibularnu- Inadditiontothemainolfactorysystem,manymammals (butnothumans)haveasecondol-
clei? factorysystemconcernedwithdetectingpheromones.Pheromones aresignalingchemicals re-
- Whatis theprimaryfunctionof thelateralvestibulospinaltract? leasedintotheenvironmenttocausebehavioralchanges innearbyindividuals.Insects use
pheromones tosignalawiderangeofsituations,includingsexualreadiness,alarm,andto
markatrail.Mostmammals haveasmallpheromonedetectingsystemcalledtheaccessory
olfactorysystem.Itis primarilyrelatedtosexualsignaling.This systemis notpresentinhu-
mans.
Thepheromone-sensitiveareainthenoseis calledthevomeronasalorgan.Removalofthe
vomeronasalorganinjuvenilemalemicedoes notimpair food-findingabilities butdoes
75 76

impair theirabilitytorecognizesexualsignals frompotentialmates.Axons ofreceptorneur-
ons inthevomeronasalorganprojectexclusivelytotheaccessoryolfactorybulb(AOB)adja-
centtothemainolfactorybulb.Theoutputoftheaccessoryolfactorybulbis toaspecialnuc-
leus superficialtotheamygdala,calledthebednucleus oftheaccessoryolfactorytract.
Projections from the olfactory receptors to the brain
Nervefibers connectedtotheolfactoryreceptor cells intheroofofthenoseformtwelveto
twentyolfactorynervebundles.Thesenervebundles travelthroughaseries ofbonycanals in
theethmoidbonetoreachtheolfactorybulbontheventralsideofthefrontallobe.Because
theolfactorysystemis anextensionoftheforebrainandnotatypicalnerve,itis surrounded
bymeninges andcerebrospinalfluid.Fractures of thebonyroofofthenosecanthereforeres-
ultinmeningealtears andcerebrospinalfluidleakage.Thefluidleaks outthroughthenose,
andthemeningealtearcan resultinpotentiallyfatalbacterialinfectioninthecerebrospinal
fluidspacearoundthebrain.
Fibers of theolfactorybulbcontinuetoformtheolfactorytract,whichlies inagrooveonthe
ventralsurfaceofthefrontallobe.Theolfactorytractends bydividingintoamedialandalat-
eralbranch.Thelargerlateralbranch(calledthelateralolfactorytract)ends mainlyinthe
primaryolfactorycortex.Theprimaryolfactorycortexis traditionallycalledthepiriformcor-
tex.Inhumans,theprimaryolfactorycortexis locatedinagyrus calledtheuncus.Theuncus
is themostrostralpartoftheparahippocampalgyrus ofthemedialsideofthetemporallobe.
Theuncus sits onthemedialsurfaceoftheamygdalaandis rostraltothehippocampus.
Someolfactorytractfibers cross intheanterior commissurepathwaytoconnectoneolfactory
bulbtothatoftheoppositeside.
Thebloodsupplytotheuncus canbecutoff duringadifficultbirthwhenpressureonthehead
duringlaborpushes thetemporallobeagainsttheduralroofofthecerebellum.This candam-
agetheunderlyingamygdalaandmayresultinanatypicalformofepilepsylaterinlife,called Theolfactory(piriform)cortexis in agyrus calledtheuncus.Itlies attherostraltipofthe
temporallobeepilepsyoruncinateepilepsy. parahippocampalgyrus ofthetemporallobe.Theolfactorycortexis superficialtotheamy-
gdalaandis rostraltothehippocampus.Theworduncus means ahook,which describes
Theolfactoryventricleis asmallspacefilledwithcerebrospinalfluidinthemiddleoftheol- theshapeofthis smallgyrus.
factorybulb.Itis formedfromanextensionof thelateralventricle.Inrodents,anareadirectly
under thelateralventricle,thesubventricular zone,produces stemcells thatmigrateforward
fromthelateralventricleintotheolfactorybulb.Theyprovideacontinualsourceofnew
neurons fortheolfactorysystemthroughoutadultlife.This cellgroupis calledtherostralmi- Questions for repetition
gratorystream.Therostralmigratorystreamandthehippocampus aretheonlyplaces where
postnatalneurogenesis occurs inthebrain.Arostralmigratorystreamhas beenshowninthe - Which sense is extremely closely related to the sense of smell?
postnatalhumanbrain,butitis relativelysmallandbecomes evensmalleras thebrainma- - How can mammals also perceive pheromones?
tures. - Is the olfactory nerve built like a peripheral nerve?
- What is the primary olfactory cortex in humans called?
- Are the receptor neurons of the sense of smell a stable tissue?
77 78

Taste THE AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
Tastereceptors inthetonguesendinformationviathefacialandglossopharyngealnerves to
The autonomic nervous system (ANS)
thehindbrain.Thetastereceptors of theanterior two-thirds ofthetongueareconnectedwith
sensoryfibers ofthefacialnerve.Thetastereceptors oftheposteriorthirdofthetongueare
Theeffector systems thatcontroltheinternalorgans,glands,andbloodvessels arecollec-
connectedwithsensoryfibers of theglossopharyngeal.Notsurprisingly,thefacialandglos-
tivelycalledtheautonomicmotorsystembecausemostoftheir functions areautomaticand
sopharyngealnerves alsocontrolthesalivaryglands.Theglossopharyngealnervesupplies the
involuntary.Theycanalsobecalledthevisceralmotorsystemtodistinguishitfromtheso-
largeparotidgland,andthefacialsupplies thesmallersubmandibularandsublingualglands
maticmotorsystemthatcontrols thevoluntarymuscles.Theautonomicmotorsystemis di-
withparasympatheticsecretomotor fibers.
videdintosympatheticand parasympatheticgroups basedonfunctionandanatomy.Thesym-
Thetastesensoryfibers inthefacialandglossopharyngealnerves formadistinctbundleinthe
patheticgroupis involvedinthecontrolof thearterialsystemandemergency(fightorflight)
hindbraincalledthesolitarytract,whichlies betweenthedorsalnucleus ofthevagus andthe
responses.Incontrast,theparasympatheticgroupcontrols thenormalday-to-dayfunctions of
spinalvestibularnucleus.Thehindbraintastenucleus surroundingthesolitarytractis called
theinternalorgans,suchas salivationanddigestion. Finally,thelocalneuronnetworks which
thenucleus ofthesolitarytract.
coordinatetheactions ofthestomachandintestines areoftengroupedunderthenameenteric
nervous system.
Locationofthesympatheticandparasympatheticmotorcenters
Whereas themotor neurons thatsupplythevoluntarymuscles arefoundinallregions ofthe
brainstemandspinalcord,theautonomicmotorcenters occupyonlyrestrictedareas:the
sympatheticmotorcenters areonlylocatedinthoracicandupper lumbarspinalcordsegments
(T1toL2),andtheparasympatheticmotorcenters areonlyfoundinthebrainstemandinthe
sacralspinalcord.Thecervicalspinalcord,thecoccygealspinalcord,andmostofthelumbar
spinalcordcontainneithersympatheticnorparasympatheticmotorcenters.Therestrictedori-
ginofthesympatheticandparasympatheticmotorsystems poses achallengefordistribution
sinceeachsystemmustsupplystructures fromheadtotail.Thesympatheticandparasympa-
theticsystems possess differentsolutions todistributetheiractivitytoallappropriateparts of
thebody.
Thesympatheticsystemarises fromspinalnervesT2toL2,butitspreads its influence
throughthesympatheticchain,whichextends fromthebaseoftheskulltothepelvis.The
parasympatheticsystemhas its origins inthebrainstemandthesacralspinalcord.Therefore,
its solutionis throughthelongcourseofthevagus nerve,whichsupplies thoracicandabdom-
inalviscerafromthenecktothepelvis.Inthepelvis,itmeets thesacralparasympatheticout-
flow fromsacralnerves 2,3,and4.
Thesolitarytractstands outin this hindbrain section becauseitis madeupofdark-stained
myelinatedfibers in an otherwisecellular areaoccupiedbycranialnervenuclei(arrow).
Thenucleus ofthesolitarytractprojects tothemedialpartoftheventroposteriornucleus of
thethalamus andthetasteinformationis thensentfromthethalamus totheinsularcortexand
thefrontaloperculum.
Thetastereceptors inthetonguehaveonlyalimitedrangeofperception(salt,sweet,sour,
bitter,andumami),andmuchofwhatwethinkofas 'taste' is actuallybasedoninformation
fromtheolfactorysystem.Odors fromfoodinthemouthreachtheolfactoryreceptors inthe
roofofthenose.Theimportanceoftheolfactoryinformationinappreciatingthetasteoffood
becomes obvious whenan infectionblocks olfactoryreceptioninthenose,suchas happens
withthecommoncold.Withnoolfactoryreception,foodseems tolosealmostallits taste.
Questions for repetition
- Whichnerves innervatethetastecells of thetongue?
- Whatis thenameofthefusionofthenervefibers ofthetastecellinnervatingnerves?
- Whycanwetasteworsewhenwehaveacold?
79 80

Sympatheticdistribution
Thepreganglionicsympatheticneurons arefoundonlyinthemiddleregionofthespinalcord,
fromthesecondthoracicsegmenttothefirstlumbar segment.Distributiontomorerostraland
caudalareas ofthebodyis achievedbytheexistenceofthesympatheticchain–alongsystem
ofnerves thatruns alongsidethebodies of thevertebrae.Thesympatheticmotorgangliaare
embeddedinthis chain,withapproximatelytwentygangliaoneachside.Fromtheganglia,
postganglionicsympatheticfibers aredistributedtoalllevels oftheheadandtrunkandalsoto
thelimbs.
Functions of theparasympatheticnervous system
Theparasympatheticnervous systemis responsibleforthenormalday-to-dayfunctions ofthe
internalorgans (arolewhichcanbedescribedas 'restanddigest').Parasympatheticactions on
thecardiovascularsystemareoppositetothoseofthesympatheticnervous system;the
parasympatheticoutflow lowers theheartrateandbloodpressure.Theparasympatheticner-
vous systemdoes notsendnerves tothelimbs,soits roleis restrictedtotheglands andorgans
oftheheadandtrunk.Itis alsoresponsibleforpenileerectionandbladderemptying.
Parasympatheticdistribution
Thecranialparasympatheticnerves supplythepupilandciliarymuscle(oculomotornerve),
smallsecretoryglands oftheeyeandnose,smallsalivaryglands (facialnerve),theparotid
gland(glossopharyngealnerve),andorgans oftheneck,thoraxandabdomen(thevagus
nerve).Thevagus parasympatheticsupplygoes tothelarynx,esophagus,lungs,heart,stom-
Adiagramshowingthedistribution ofthesympatheticnervous system(in red)andthedis- ach,andthesmallandlargeintestines.Thesacralpreganglionicneurons supplyeffectorneu-
tribution oftheparasympatheticnervous system(in blue). rons inthesigmoidcolon,rectum,bladder,andgenitalia.
Autonomicganglia Transmittersubstances intheautonomicnervous system
Inthesomaticmotoroutflow,asinglemotor neuronconnects thebrainstemorspinalcordto Allsympatheticandparasympatheticpreganglionicmotorneurons arelikesomaticmotor
atargetmuscle,whereas,intheautonomicnervous system,themotoroutflow is formedbya neurons inthattheyuseacetylcholineas their transmittersubstance.Theparasympathetic
two-neuronchain.Thefirstautonomicmotor neuroninthechainis locatedinsidethebrain- ganglionicneurons arealsocholinergic.However,thesympatheticganglioniceffectorneu-
stemor spinalcord;itsends its axontoasecondeffectorneuronlocatedinaganglionoutside rons arenoradrenergic.
ofthecentralnervous system.Theaxonofthesecond neurontheninnervates thetargetorgan.
Thetwo-neuronsystemenables asingleautonomicmotorneurontotriggerhundreds ofgan-
glioniceffectorneurons,producingwidespreadeffects,suchas arterialconstrictiontoraise
bloodpressure. Higherautonomiccontrol
Becausethesecondmotorneurons intheautonomicchainareclusteredtogetheringanglia, Themotorneurons oftheautonomicnervous systemareregulatedbycenters inthehypothal-
thefirstneuronis calledpreganglionic,andthesecondneuronis calledganglionic.Inthecase amus andbrainstem.Thesecenters controlvitalfunctions ofthecardiovascularandrespira-
ofthesympatheticnervous system,thegangliaareclosetothespinalcord,sothepregan- torysystems,as wellas salivation,swallowing,digestionperistalsis,defecation,andurina-
glioniccells haveonlyshortaxons,andtheganglionicneuronaxons arelong.Inthecaseof tion.Atalevelabovethebrainstem,thehypothalamus triggers theseautonomicfunctional
theparasympatheticnervous system,themotorgangliaarelocatedveryclosetothetargetor- centers as partofmoresignificantbehavioralresponses,suchas thoseinvolvedinaggression.
gans (someareevenembeddedinthewalls ofthetargetorgans),andsotheaxons ofthepre- Anger is associatedwithincreases inheartrate,bloodpressure,andrespiratoryrate.
ganglioniccells areoftenrelativelylong,andtheganglionicaxons areveryshort.
Theentericnervous system(ENS)
Functions ofthesympatheticnervous system Thenetworks ofneurons embeddedinthewallofthegut,whichregulateandcoordinateits
Thesympatheticnervous systemis oftendescribedas afightorflightsystem.Itrapidlymobi- activity,arecalledtheentericnervous system.This subdivisionoftheautonomicnervous sys-
lizes criticalbodilysystems intimes ofemergencyor stress,preparingthebodyforactionby temdeserves auniquenamebecauseitis solarge.Inhumans,itcontains 200-600million
raisingbloodpressure,relaxingandopeningairways, mobilizingenergysources,andtempo- neurons,morethanintheentirespinalcord.Theentericnervous systemcontrols thecontrac-
rarilyshuttingdowndigestion.Mostimportantly,itincreases bloodflow tomuscles byshut- tions andsecretions ofthestomach,intestines,andotherdigestiveorgans.Althoughthecen-
tingdownbloodflow totheskinandintestines. tralautonomicnervous systeminfluences theENS,itis capableofindependentactionthrough
Thesympatheticnervous systemcanincreaseits influenceoverthebloodvessels ofthebody its ownreflexsystems.Theentericnervous systemis alsofunctionallylinkedtothebody's
bytriggeringthereleaseofadrenalineandnoradrenalinefromtheadrenalmedulla.Thesetwo immunesystemtohelpdefendagainstinvasivemicroorganisms inthegut.Inmanyways,the
hormones haveessentiallythesameeffectas thepostganglionicsympatheticnerves,butbe- entericnervous systemseems tobeevolutionarilyolderthanthecentralnervous system,pre-
causetheyremaininthebloodstream,thesehormones amplifyandprolongthesympathetic sumablybecausefoodintakeanddigestionarepriorities forsimpleorganisms.
actions andcaninfluencecells thatarenotdirectlyinnervatedbysympatheticnerves.
81 82

Theentericnervous systemuses abouttwentydifferenttransmittersubstances,themostim- BLOOD SUPPLY TO THE BRAIN
portantof whichareacetylcholine,vasoactiveintestinalpolypeptide(VIP),nitricoxide(NO),
GABA,andserotonin.Complexnetworks intheentericnervous systemcanlearntoadaptto
The blood supply to the brain
challenges intheabsenceofCNS control.InHirschsprung's disease,thereis acongenitalab-
senceofparasympatheticinnervationof thesigmoidcolon,whichmakes thesuffererunable
todefecate.Treatmentconsists of removalofthenon-innervatedregionofthecolon.Abouta
Arterialsupply
yearafter removingthedenervatedsection,theremainingcolonlearns todefecate.
Thearterialsupplytothebraincomes fromtwointernalcarotidarteries atthefrontandtwo
vertebralarteries attheback.Eachinternalcarotidarterydivides intoalargermiddlecerebral
arteryandasmalleranteriorcerebralartery.Thetwovertebralarteries jointoformthebasilar
Questions forrepetition artery,which supplies thebrainstem.Thebasilararterydivides toformthetwoposterior
cerebralarteries.Thecarotidandbasilarsystems arelinkedtogetherbysmallcommunicating
- How cantheautonomicnervous systembesubdivided? arteries toformanarterialcircle(thecircleofWillis)atthebaseofthebrain.
- Withinwhichspinalcordsegments arethesympatheticmotorfibers located?
- How arethesympatheticganglialocatedinrelationtothespinalcordandeffectororgan?
- Namethreefunctions ofthesympatheticandparasympatheticnervous systems.
- Namethreeneurotransmitters thatplayaroleintheentericnervous system.
ThearterialcircleofWillis is formedbythetwoposterior cerebralarteries (branches ofthe
basilar artery)andbranches oftheinternalcarotidartery(themiddlecerebralartery,
anterior cerebralartery.Theposterior andanterior communicatingarteries completethe
circle.
Themiddlecerebralarterysupplies mostof thelateralsurfaceofthecerebralcortex.The
anteriorcerebralarterysupplies themedialsideofthefronthalf ofthecortexandastrip
aroundtheanteriorandsuperiormarginofthelateralcortex.Theposteriorcerebralartery
supplies mostoftheoccipitallobe,includingthevisualcortex.
Thethreemaincerebralarteries senddeepperforatingbranches todeepcerebralstructures
(suchas theinternalcapsule)beforereachingtheircorticalbranches.
83 84

The arterial supply to the lateral cerebrum by the middle cerebral artery (red), the anterior
cerebralartery(green),andtheposterior cerebralartery(blue).
Venous drainageofthebrain
Theveinsofthecerebrumendinduralvenoussinusesthatsurroundthebrain.Theduralsinuses
areembeddedintheduramater,andtheydrainintotheinternaljugularvein.
The venous sinuses also drain the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) into the bloodstream. The CSF is
absorbedintothevenoussinusesthrougharachnoidgranulations,whichareevaginationsofthe
arachnoid mater. The most prominent dural sinuses are the superior sagittal sinus, the inferior
sagittalsinus, theoccipitalsinus,andthetransversesinus.
Venous drainage of the brain. The superior sagittal sinus collects blood from the lateral
aspectofthecerebralhemispheres.Thesuperiorsagittalsinusformstwotransversesinuses,
which drain into the internal jugular vein. The Inferior sagittal sinus forms the straight
sinus,which joins thejunction of thesuperior sagittalandtransversesinuses.
Questions forrepetition
- Whicharteries formtheCircleofWillis?
- Thespeechcenters areinthesupplyareaofwhichlargerartery?
- Whatarethestructures calledinwhichthespinalfluidis absorbedintothevenous si-
nuses?
85 86

THE CIRCULATION OF CEREBROSPINAL FLUID Themainpartofthechoroidplexus lies inthemedialwallof thebodyandtheinferiorhornof
thelateralventricle.Nevertheless,groups ofchoroidplexus cells arepresentintheroofofthe
The cerebrospinal fluid and its circulation thirdventricleandtheroofofthelowerhalfofthefourthventricleas well.Ifcerebrospinal
Thebrainand spinalcordaresurroundedbythreemeningeallayers–athickdurallayernextto fluidcirculationis blocked,CSF willaccumulateintheventricularsystemofthecerebral
thebone,athinarachnoidlayer deeptothedura,andathinpiallayeronthesurfaceofthe hemispheres.Graduallythecerebralventricles willbeforcedtoexpand,andcells inthe
brainandspinalcord.Thespacebetweenthearachnoidandthepia(thesubarachnoidspace) cerebralcortexwillbekilledbycompression.This conditionis knownas hydrocephalus.
is filledwithaclearliquidcalledcerebrospinalfluid(CSF).Thesoftstructureofthebrain
Theblood-brainbarrierandthecircumventricularorgans
makes itvulnerabletomechanicaldamage;therefore,thecerebrospinalfluidacts as ashock
Theblood-brainbarrierprevents particularmolecules inthebloodstreamfromreachingthe
absorber toprotectitagainstinjury.
brain's tissues.This systemhelps protectthebrainfrombacteria,viruses,andchemicaltoxins
thatcouldcausedamage.Theblood-brainbarrieris createdbymembranespecializations in
thewalls oftheendothelialcells ofthebraincapillaries.Water-solublemolecules cannotpass
throughthecellularmembraneoftheendothelialcells andsoareunabletoreachtheextracel-
lularfluidofthebraintissues.However,smalllipid-solublemolecules cantravelthroughthe
membrane–afactorthatpromptedthedevelopmentoflipid-solubledrugs toreachthebrain.
Theblood–brainbarrieris notpresentinthecircumventricularorgans of thebrain.Theseare
small,specializedareas in thewalls ofthethirdandfourthventricles.Neurons intheventricu-
larorgans areabletomonitor thelevels ofcertainchemicals inthebloodstream.
Questions forrepetition
-Whereisthespinalfluidformed?
-Describetheflowofspinalfluid.
-Inwhichareascanneuronsobtaininformationaboutchemicalcomponentsoftheblood?
Overviewoftheventricular system;HenryGray(1918)AnatomyoftheHuman Body.
Circulation
TheCSF is manufacturedinsidethebrainbythechoroidplexuses ofthebrainventricularsys-
tem.Theventricularsystemof thecerebrumconsists oftwolateralventricles -oneinside
each cerebralhemisphere.Thelateralventricles drain intothethirdventricle,anarrow slit
betweenthetwohalves ofthehypothalamus andthalamus.TheCSF thentravels alongathin
tubeinthemidbraincalled theaqueduct.Theaqueductdrains intothefourthventricle,
betweenthecerebellumandthehindbrain.Finally,thefluidescapes throughthreeholes inthe
roofofthefourthventricletoreachthesubarachnoidspace.Cerebrospinalfluidis reabsorbed
intothebloodcirculationbyspecializedstructures in thewalls oflargeveins thatlinethein-
sideoftheskull.
87 88

STAINING AND IMAGING
Staining and imaging - Fundamentals
Informationaboutthedetailedstructureof thebrainandspinalcordcanbegatheredfromthe
microscopicstudyofthinsections thathavebeenstainedtoshow thepresenceofnervecells
andtheirprocesses.
Cutting thin sections
Thinsections canbecutfromfreshbraintissuethathas beenfrozen,butinmostcases,brain
sections arecollectedfrombraintissuethathas beenpreservedwithafixativechemicallike
formalin.Thinsections arecutwithamicrotome–aspecialslicingmachinecuttingsections
rangingfrom5to100micrometers (µm) inthickness. Formalin-fixedtissueis usuallypre-
paredfor sectioningbyembeddingitinparaffinwaxorcelloidin,butitcanalsobefrozenbe-
foresectioning.
Staining brain sections Acoronalsection ofhuman brain stemstainedwith theWeigertmethodfor myelin.Large
tracts likethepyramids andthemediallemniscus stain darkly,whereas cellular areas like
Thetwoclassicstainingmethods aretheNisslstainforstainingneuroncellbodies andstains
theinferior oliveareunstained.
formyelinatedaxons.Nisslstains useavarietyof dyes,suchas thioninandcresylviolet,to
revealdetails ofthecellbodyandnucleus ofneurons andglia.TheNisslstainis mostintense
innucleoliandintheroughendoplasmicreticulumofneurons. The Golgi method
AdisappointingfeatureofNisslstains is thattheyonlyshow thepresenceofneuronalcell
bodies.However,CamilloGolgibrilliantlysolvedthis problemattheendofthenineteenth
century.Golgidevelopedaremarkablesilver stainthatrevealeddetails ofdendrites andaxons
andcellbodies.Thecells andtheirprocesses arestainedblackagainstagoldenbackground.
TheGolgistainwas sousefulbecauseitonlystains aboutonepercentoftheneurons inthe
sectionbeingexaminedsothatindividualneurons canbeseeninisolation.Ifallneurons were
stained,theimagewouldbesolidblack.Theuseofthis stainlaunchedarevolutionintheun-
derstandingofbrainanatomypioneeredbytheSpaniardRamonyCajal.
In this Nissl-stainedsection ofrathippocampus,someneurons arepackedtightlytogether,
sotheyseemtoformacontinuous lineofvioletcolor.In other areas,cells can beseen like
grains of sandscatteredover theimage.Itis impossibletodistinguish between smallneur-
ons andgliaatthis magnification clearly.
Stains thatshow thepresenceof myelinhavebeenverywidelyusedinthestudyofhuman
brains for overacentury.Thestains canbeappliedto histologicalsections andthickslices of
This is athicksection ofthecerebralcortexstainedwith theGolgimethod.Thestain shows
thehumanbrain.Themyelinstains mostcommonlyusedaretheWeigertorLuxolfastblue
details ofthecellbody,dendrites,andaxon ofalargepyramidalcellin thelower halfofthe
methods.
image.
Untilthemiddleofthetwentiethcentury,almostallthatwas learnedaboutbrainstructure
camefromthestudyofGolgi-stainedsections.Thenextphaseofneuroanatomicalresearch
was launchedbyusinghistochemicalstains andmethods fortracingneuronalconnections.
Histochemical staining
Histochemicalstains areusedtomarkspecificcellular components ofneurons orglia,fol-
lowedbyapplyingdyes attractedtothemarkedelements.Manyhistochemicalmethods are
89 90

aimedatdetectingthepresenceof enzymes,andthesetechniques usuallyworkbestonun-
fixedorlightlyfixed
sections inwhichtheenzymes areundamaged.
Acetylcholinesterase(AChE) staininguses s-acetylthiocholineiodideandethopropazineto
depositabrownproductwherevertheacetylcholinesteraseenzymeis presentandactive.
Sincemany
neurons havereceptors foracetylcholine,this techniquecanbeusedtocharacterize
regions ofstrongcholinergicactivityanddifferentiatebetweendifferentareas inthebrain.
Motorneurons containlargeamounts of acetylcholinesterase,andtheAChEstainis veryef-
fectiveinshowingtheirdistributioninthebrainstemandspinalcord.
ThevalueofAChEstainingcanbeseenintheadjacentAChEsectionofthehippocampus ina
ratbrainsection.Thestainreveals aremarkablelevelofdetailinthelayers andsub-layers of
thehippocampus.
This is acoronalsection ofratbrain stainedwith theTimm-Danscher method.Thedark
silver deposits showtheregions thatcontain high concentrations ofzinc.
Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemicalstains useantibodies todetectthepresenceofparticularproteins in
neurons.
Asection ofratbrain stainedtoshowthepresenceoftheenzymeacetylcholinesterasein the
Themainchallengeforimmunohistochemistryis ensuringthatantibodies onlybindtothe
hippocampus
proteinofinterestandnootherrelatedproteins.Calcium-bindingproteins (suchas calbindin,
calretinin,andparvalbumin)areoftenrestrictedtoparticularcellgroups,andimmunohisto-
Avarietyofotherhistochemicalstains havebeendevelopedtodetectthepresenceofother
chemicalmethods todetecttheseproteins areveryusefulinanatomicalmappingstudies.
transmittersubstances,suchas nitricoxide.
Zincandothermetalstains arebasedonmethods thatdepositsilverorfluorescentdyes
aroundions ofzincandotherheavymetals.TheTimm-Danschersilverstainis commonly
usedtoshow thepresenceofzinc.Zincis usedin
DNAregulationandsynapticplasticity,as wellas othercellularsignaling.Thatis whyzinc
stains canshow
long-termactivitypatterns andresponses tochange.
This is asection ofthecerebellumofamarmosetmonkeyin which thepresenceofthecal-
cium-bindingprotein calbindin has been revealedbyimmunohistochemicalstaining.In
this section,thePurkinjecellbodies arestainedformingalinebetween thedarkbrown
stainedmolecular layer andthelightbrown stainedgranulecelllayer.
91 92

Neurofilaments arestructuralproteins presentincertaintypes ofneurons.Themonoclonalan-
tibodySMI-32is widelyusedbecauseitcandemonstratethepresenceofaparticularneurofil-
amentproteinindifferentstructures of thenervous system.NeuN is anantibodyspecificto
theNeuN nuclearproteinexpressedbynearlyallneurons andneveringlialcells.Afew
neurontypes (suchas thecerebellum's Purkinjecells)donotexpress theNeuN proteinand
arethereforeunlabelled.
Retrogradetracing.This imageshows agroupofneurons showingthepresenceoftheret-
rogradetracer DiI which hadbeen injectedin theregion oftheaxon terminals ofthese
neurons.Themarker was carriedbyretrogradetransportalongtheaxons toreach their
parentcellbodies
Thevalueoftracingdatadepends ontheaccuratelocalizationofthepointwherethetraceris
delivered.Theexactidentificationofthedesireddeliverypointis generallybasedontheuse
ofastereotaxicatlas.Stereotaxicatlases arethree-dimensionalmaps thatcanbeusedtodefine
Atransversesection ofmousespinalcordshowingthepresenceofNeuN antibody.Thecell thelocationofnucleiandtracts withreferencetotheselandmarks,suchas bregma,thatcan
bodies anddendrites ofmotor neurons in theventralhorn areclearlystained.In thedorsal belocatedduringsurgery.Sometracers canbedetectedintargetareas withinless thanaday,
horn,thestain shows thepresenceofmanytinyneurons.Weknowtheseareneurons butothers takeweeks toreachtheir destination.Tracers canbedetectedwithfluorescenceor
rather than gliabecauseglialcells donotcontain theNeuN protein. withhistochemicaltechniques.
Glialproteinmarkers areusedtodistinguishparticularglialcelltypes.GFAP(glialfibrillary Molecular genetics
acidicprotein)identifies astrocytes,andother antibodies areusedtomarkproteins specificto Theabilitytotargetgenes inmicewas developedinthe1980s byNobelPrizewinners Capec-
microgliaandoligodendrocytes. chi,Evans,andSmithies.Genetargetingcanknock-outgenes or insert(knock-in)new genes
intodevelopingcells.Geneknock-ins andknock-outs usetechniques thatcanaddafunction-
inggenetotheorganismor disableageneitalreadyhas sothatits effectontheanimalcanbe
Tracing connections in the nervous system trackedthroughdevelopmentandadulthood.
Untilabout1970,themosteffectivewayof tracingconnections inthenervous systemwas a
silverstainfordegeneratingaxons.Whenaparticular partofthenervous systemis damaged,
thedegeneratingaxons fromthedamagedneurons canbestainedwithasilverstainfirstde-
velopedbyNautaatMITaround1950.This techniquewas themainstayoftracingstudies be-
foreintroducingmoderntracingstudies,suchas thoseusinghorseradishperoxidase(HRP),
thatusenormalaxonaltransportmechanisms.HRPuses retrogradeaxonaltransporttomark
cellbodies afteritis pickedupintoaxonterminals.Still,manynewertracers,suchas cholera
toxinB,useanterogradetransporttoshow theterminaldistributionofparticularaxons.
Asagittalsection ofmousebrain showingtheexpression ofthegenePhox2b.Phox2bis
stronglyexpressedin thefacialnucleus (largeovalareanear theventralmargin).
93 94

MRI imaging
Amajor breakthroughinthe1990ledtotheuseofmagneticresonance(MRI)forimagingthe
brain.MRIrelies ontheabilitytoexcitespecifictypes ofatoms (usuallyhydrogeninwater
molecules)andtoimagethemsystematically.This allows detailedthree-dimensionalmaps to
beobtained.MRIresolution
depends onthestrengthofthemagneticfieldused.EarlyMRIimagingusedfieldstrengths of
1-3Tesla,
whichyieldedaresolutionof 1-3mm,butnew small-volumeMRIscanners use16Tesla
fields,whichcanresolvestructures inthe20-50µmrange.
An imageofaratbrain obtainedwith a9TeslaMRI scanner.
Questions for repetition
- Whatis stainedduringmyelinstaining?
- Whatstaincanbeusedtostainmyelin?
- Whichneurons areparticularlyrichinAChE?
- Whataxonaltransportmechanismdomanytracers use?
95



IBB 2022
Additional Learning Ressource:
Neuroanatomy
Charles Watson
Matthew Kirkcaldie, Friedrich Schwarz
April 2022

AN INTRODUCTION TO THEANATOMY OF THE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM1
Introduction 1
DEVELOPMENT OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 4
The development of the nervous system 4
THE SPINAL CORD 14
Spinal Cord 14
THE BRAIN STEM 22
Brain stem 22
The brain stem cranial nerves 32
The cerebellum 36
DIENCEPHALON 40
The diencephalon 40
HYPOTHALAMUS 42
The hypothalamus 42
Telencephalon 46
The Telencephalon 46
The Broadmann areas of the cortex 51
MOTOR SYSTEMS 53
Motor systems 53
SENSORY SYSTEM 59
The somatosory system 59
The visual system 63
The auditory system 66
The vestibular system 69
Olfaction 73
Taste 77
THEAUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM 79
The autonomic nervous system (ANS) 79

BLOOD SUPPLY TO THE BRAIN 82
The blood supply to the brain 82
THE CIRCULATION OF CEREBROSPINAL FLUID 85
The cerebrospinal fluid and its circulation 85
STAININGAND IMAGING 87
Staining and imaging - Fundamentals 87

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE ANATOMY OF THE CENTRAL
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Introduction
This introductionis avery brief summaryof theparts ofthecentralnervous systemandtheir
functions.Youmayfindithelpfultohavethis basicinformationbeforeyoubeginadetailed
studyoftheparts ofthebrain.
Thecentralnervous systemconsists ofthebrainandthespinalcord.Thespinalcordis rela-
tivelysimpleinstructure,butthebrainis veryelaborate.Themainparts ofthebrainarethe
brainstem,cerebellum,andforebrain.
Thebrainand spinalcordareconnectedtoparts of thebodybynerves.Thesenerves areboth
sensoryandmotor.Thereare12pairs of nerves connectedtothebrain(thecranialnerves)and
32pairs ofnerves connectedtothespinalcord(thespinalnerves).
Thefunctions ofthecentralnervous systemarearrangedhierarchically,withthesimplest
functions (likestandingandwalking) locatedinthespinalcordandthemostsophisticated
functions (likethinkingand memory)locatedintheforebrain.Inbetween,thebrainstemis
responsibleforsurvivalfunctions likebreathing,eating,vocalisation,andbalance.Theadvan-
tageof this hierarchicalarrangementis thatcomplexfunctions arepre-packagedinthebrain
stemandspinalcord;theyactas completefunctionalmodules,readytorespondtocommands
fromtheforebrain.
Thespinalcord
Inoldertimes,thespinalcordwas picturedas asimplesensoryreceivingstationwithsimple
connections tothemuscles andinternalorgans.Thesefacts arestillpartiallytrue,butthey
onlytellpartofthestory.Forexample,thespinalcord actionmodules cancontrolwhole
movementpatterns,notjustconnections tosinglemuscles.Morethanthat,itcancoordinate
muscleactivityinvolvedin walking,standing,balance,andreachingandgrasping.There-
markablecontrolofthespinalcordcanbeseeninanimals likehorses thatareabletostand
andmovearoundwithinminutes ofbeingbornbecausethesefunctions arealreadypre-pro-
grammedinthespinalcord.
Thewiringofthespinalcordenables ittorespondto somesensorysignals inarapidreflex
waybeforethebrainis evenawareof thesensorysignal.Aprimeexampleis whenwestepon
somethingsharpwithbarefeet.Thespinalcordcauses thelowerlimbtoflexandpullaway
fromthesharpobject.Atthesametime,itcauses theextensormuscles intheoppositelower
limbtocontractinorderto stopyoufromoverbalancing.
Thespinalcordis strongly connectedtotheinternalorgans andbloodvessels throughnerves
thatarecalledautonomic.Autonomicnerves controltheworkings ofbloodvessels andthein-
ternalorgans liketheintestines andbladder.Someofthesefunctions,butnotall,canbecon-
trolledbytheforebrainthroughits connections withthespinalcord.Theautonomicnerves
connectedtothethoracicspinalcordarecalledsympatheticnerves,andthoseconnectedto
thesacralspinalcordarecalledparasympatheticnerves.
Thebrainstem
Thebrainstemconnects thespinalcordwiththeforebrain.Itis thehomeofbasicfunctional
systems thatarevitalforsurvival.Theseincludebreathing,chewing,swallowing,vocalisa-
tion,facialexpression,andeyemusclecontrol.As wellas thecontroloftheseactions,the
brainstemreceives sensoryinformationrelatedtotaste,hearing,vision,theskinoftheface,
1

andbalance.Thebrainstemis alsoacorridor throughwhichpathways (tracts)travelfromthe
forebraintothespinalcord,andfromthespinalcordtotheforebrain.Italsocontains centres
thatsendpathways tokeeptheforebrainawakeandalert.
Thebrainstemcanbedividedintotwoparts:thehindbrain(connectedtothespinalcord)and
themidbrain(connectedtotheforebrain).Eachof theseparts gives risetoimportantexpan-
sions onthedorsalsurface.Thedorsalsurfaceofthehindbraingives risetothecerebellum,
andthedorsalsurfaceofthemidbraingives risetotwopairs ofbumps –thesuperiorandinfe-
rior colliculi.Thesuperiorcolliculiarevisualcentres,andtheinferiorcolliculiareauditory
centres.
Thecerebellum
As wehavejustnoted,thecerebellumgrows outofthehindbrain.Itis formedfromthetop
endof thehindbrain,justbehindthemidbrain.Thecerebellumis tinyatbirth,butitlearns to
coordinatecomplexmovements duringthenextfiveyears andbeyond.Thecerebellumcon-
tains anenormous numberoftinyneurons calledgranulecells involvedinlearningcoordina-
tion.Almost80%ofalltheneurons inthebrainarefoundinthecerebellum.
Theforebrain
Theforebrainhas acentralpartthatcontinues thebrainstem,andamassiveoutgrowthon
each sidecalledthecerebralhemisphere.
Thalamus andhypothalamus
Thesmallercentralpartoftheforebrainis madeupof twomainstructures,thethalamus and
thehypothalamus.Thethalamus receives sensorypathways relatedtotouch,taste,hearing,vi-
sion,andbalanceandsends this informationtothecerebralhemisphere.Thehypothalamus is
thecentreforhigh-levelcontrolof thefunctions thatensurethesurvivaloftheindividualand
thespecies.Survivaloftheindividualdepends oneatinganddrinkingandbeingabletode-
fenditself,andsurvivalofthespecies depends onreproductionandcareofoffspring.Thehy-
pothalamus carries outthesefunctions bycontrollingthesurvivalmodules inthebrainstem
andspinalcordandcontrollingtheendocrineandautonomicnervous systems.
Thecerebralhemisphere
Thecerebralhemisphereconsists ofanoutsidelayer calledthecerebralcortexandanumber
ofdeepneurongroups calledthebasalganglia.Inthehumanbrain,thecerebralcortexunder-
goes massiveexpansion,whichresults indeepfolding thatforms sulciandgyrionthesur-
face.Thecerebralcortexis subdividedintoabout180distinctareas,butweonlyknow the
precisefunctions ofsomeoftheseareas.However,wedoknow alotaboutthetotalfunctions
ofthecerebralcortexanditis usefultoremember theseundereightheadings:
- senses
- actions
- thinking
- memory
- communication
- emotions
- sleepandalertness
- relationship
Eachof thesefunctions canbesubdivided.Forexample,'senses' includes touch,taste,hear-
ing,vision,smell,andbalance,and'thinking' includes planning,decisionmakingandprob-
lem-solving.Combinations of theseeightfunctions givehumans higher-levelskills suchas
creativity,inventiveness,socialorganisation,andlearning.
2

Thebasalganglia–striatum,pallidum,andamygdala
Thecerebralhemisphere's deep(non-cortical) parts includeseveralstructures,sometimes col-
lectivelyreferredtoas thebasalganglia.This termis notentirelysatisfactorybutcanbeused
as ashorthand.Thelargerparts ofthebasalgangliaarethestriatumandpallidum,whichare
involvedininheritedandlearnedmotor functions.Whentheseareas aredamagedduringlate
pregnancy,thechildmaydevelopcerebralpalsy–acomplexcombinationofmusclestiffness
andinvoluntarymovements.Asmaller memberof thenon-corticalstructures is theamygdala,
whichplays avitalroleinemotionalresponses (particularlyfear)andsocialgroupbehaviour.
Questions forrepetition
- Whatis thecentralnervous systemconsistingof?
- How manyspinalnervepairs arethere?
- Inwhichpartofthebrainarethemostneurons?
- Whatparts oftheautonomicnervous systemexist?
3

DEVELOPMENT OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
The development of the nervous system
About14,000genes controlthedevelopmentof thebraininmammals,morethanhalfofthe
totalnumberofgenes.Thegenes firstprovidethegeneralinstructions forbuildingconnec-
tions inthebrain,butlater organisetheuniqueconnectionpatterns thatcharacteriseeach
brainregion.
Dorsalandventralspecificationof thecells intheneuraltube
Theembryonicbraindevelops fromastripofectodermalcells thatformtheneuralplate.The
edges oftheneuralplatecurlmediallytojoinandformtheneuraltube,whichencloses the
neuralcanal.
This series ofdiagrams shows theformation oftheneuraltubefromtheembryonicneural
plate.Under theinfluenceofsecretedfators fromthenotochord,thecells oftheneural
platesinkdown toformagrooveandtheedges of thegroove(red)join toformtheneural
tube.Theedges ofthegrooveformthecells oftheneuralcrest,which migrateawayfrom
theneuraltubetoformganglia,melanocytes,andtheskeleton oftheface.Figurefrom
Sanes etal.2004,courtesyofDr.Dan Sanes,NewYorkUniversity.
Atthis earlystage,thecells dorsaltotheneuralcanalaredirectedby Wntand BMPgenes to
formthetwoalarplates (whichhandlesensoryfunctions).Incontrast,thecells ventraltothe
centralcanalaredirectedbysonichedgehog(Shh)genes toformthetwobasalplates (which
areorientedtowardmotorfunctions).
4

As theneuraltubeforms fromtheneuralplate,its developmentis influcendbytheexpres-
sion of agenecalledsonichedgehog(Shh).Expression ofShh in thenotochordinduces
thedevelopmentoftheventralstructures (such as motor neurons)in theneuraltube.The
dorsoventralpatterningoftheneuraltubeis created bytheopposinginfluences odShh
(ventrally) andBMB andWntgenes (dorsally).FigurefromSanes etal.2004,courtesyof
Dr.Dan Sanes,NewYork University.
As theneuraltubecloses,ascatteringofcells breaks awayfromthedorsalsidetoformthe
neuralcrest,whichgives risetotheperipheralnervous system,melanocytes,bones andmus-
cles of theface.
Brainvesicles
As cells divide,therostralendofthetubedevelops threeswellings calledtheforebrain,mid-
brain,andhindbrainvesicles.Thecentralpartof theforebrainvesiclegives risetotwoexten-
sions,thelateralvesicles,subsequentlyformingthecerebralhemispheres.Theroofofthe
midbrainvesicle(thetectum) gives risetofour swellings thatgoontoformthesuperiorand
inferiorcolliculi.Theroofof therostralpartof thehindbrainvesicleforms thecerebellum.
Thesmallgroupofembryoniccells thatforms theneuraltubequicklymultiplyandspecialise
toformspecificfunctionalcentres inthebrain.Themultiplicationrateis extraordinaryand
thefew hundredcells intheprimitivehumanneuraltubeeventuallygenerateover80billion
nervecells.Duringthefirsttwoyears of life,therearetimes whenupto250,000new cells are
generatedeveryminute.
Segmentationinthebrain
Towards theendofthenineteenthcentury,severalembryologicalstudies foundevidenceof
segmentalsubdivisions inthebrain,whichOrr (1987)calledneuromeres.Unfortunately,the
conceptofbrainsegmentationwas largelyignoredfor thenexthundredyears,beforebeing
spectacularlyconfirmedbythenew scienceof geneexpressioninthedevelopingbrain,fol-
lowingthediscoveryofgenetargetinginmicebyMarioCapecchi(1989).Sincethen,many
studies ofgeneexpressioninthedevelopingvertebratebrainhaveconfirmedthatthebrainis
madeupof aseries ofdistinctneuromeres (Puelles etal.,2013;Watsonetal.,2017b):fivein
theforebrain,twointhemidbrain,andtwelveinthehindbrain.Eachsegmentis madeupof
alarandbasalcomponents aroundtheneuralcanal.
5

Attherostralendoftheneuraltube,threeexpansions appear -theforebrain,midbrain and
thehindbrain vesicles.Theforebrain vesicleforms thecerebralhemispheres,thedien-
cephalon,thehypothalamus,endtheeyestalk.Thehindbrain forms theisthmus,the
rhombeencephalon,andthecerebrum.
Theprimarydivisionintheneuraltubeis theseparationoftheforebrainandmidbrainonthe
onehandandfromthehindbrainontheother.This separationis definedbytheexpressionof
Otx2intheforebrainandmidbrainandtheexpressionofGbx2intherostralhindbrain.The
expressionpatternofOtx2 has ledtotheproposalthatthemidbrainsegments bedeclaredpart
oftheforebrain.
Hypothalamicsegments andtheformationofthetelencephalicvesicleandtheopticvesicle
Thefiveforebrainsegments consistoftheterminalhypothalamus (hy2),thepeduncularhypo-
thalamus (hy1),andthreediencephalicsegments calledprosomeres (p1,p2,andp3).Theter-
minalhypothalamicsegment(hy2) is therostralendoftheneuraltube.Itgives risetothete-
lencephalic(cerebral)vesicles dorsallyandtheopticvesicles rostrally,as wellas theposterior
lobeofthepituitary(neurohypophysis).
Thetelencephalicvesicleis layered:thesurfacelayer is thepallium,andbeneathis thesub-
pallium,whichsplits intofour divisions –thestriatum,pallidum,thediagonaldomain,and
thepreopticarea.
Diencephalicsegments
Thethreediencephalicsegments,fromrostraltocaudal,areprosomere1(mainlytheprethala-
mus),prosomere2(mainlythethalamus),andprosomere3(mainlythepretectalarea).The
pinealglandgrows dorsallyfromp2,andtheposteriorcommissureis foundinp3.Although
thediencephalonforms caudallytothehypothalamus,theneuraxis becomes sharplyflexed
duringdevelopment,pushingthehypothalamus intoafinalventralpositionunderthepretha-
lamus.This gavetheimpressionthatthehypothalamus was aventralcomponentofthedien-
cephalon,as itwas wronglyassumedinanolderconceptthereof,includingthethalamus.
Midbrainsegments
Themidbrainconsists ofalargerostralsegment(m1)andamuchsmallercaudalsegment
(m2).Thedorsalsurfaceof m1forms thesuperiorcolliculus andinferiorcolliculus oneach
side.Inthepast,thepretectalsegmentof thediencephalon(includingtheposteriorcommis-
sure)was mistakenlythoughttobelongtothemidbrain.Additionally,thefirstsegmentofthe
hindbrain,theisthmus,was alsomistakenlythoughtto belongtothemidbrain,butgeneex-
6

pressionproves itis not.Thesharpbendof theneuraxis atthelevelofthemidbrain(the
cephalicflexure)results fromtheunder-developmentoftheventralsurfacebutleaves thedor-
salsurfaceintact.This creates aheart-shapedprofileinsagittalsections.
Hindbrainsegments
Thehindbrainis madeupoftheisthmus andelevenrhombomeres (r1tor11).Inoldertext-
books,theisthmus,whichcontains thetrochlearnucleus,was sometimes calledrhombomere
zero(r0).Thedorsalparts oftheisthmus andrhombomere1giverisetothecerebellum.The
pontinenucleiareformedontheventralsurfaceofrhombomeres 3and4.
This is adiagramofan adultrodentbrain showingtheposition ofthesegments ofthe
hindbrain.Theembryonichindbarin contains twelvecompartments fromrostraltocaudal.
Thefirstcompartment,adjacenttothemidbrain is calledtheisthmus.Theremaining
eleven compartments arecalledrhombomeres.Rhombomeres 2to11aredefinedbytheex-
pression ofdifferenthoxgenes.Theisthmus is definedbytheexpression offgf8.Thecere-
bellumis formedbyextensions oftheisthmus andthefirstrhombomere.
Thegenes responsibleforcreatingthemajorityof therhombomeres (r2tor11)arethehome-
obox(hox)genes.Thehoxgenes,discoveredinitiallyindevelopinginsects,arealsouniver-
sallyimportantfornervous systemdevelopmentinvertebrates.Thefirstfour hoxgroups
(hox1-hox4)areexpressedinthehindbrain,and hox5-hox13 areexpressedinthespinalcord,
trunk,limbs,andtail.
Thehoxgenes arenotexpressedintheisthmus andinthefirstrhombomere,whichinsteadex-
press Gbx2,furthersubdividedby Fgf8 expressionintheisthmus.
Theneuralcanalofthehindbrainopens updorsallytoformthefourthventricle,withathick-
enedlateralmargincalledtherhombiclip.
Flexionoftheneuraltube
As mentionedabove,theneuraltubedoes notremainstraightduringdevelopment.Becauseof
differentialdorsalandventralgrowthinsomeareas,thetubeformingthebrainis forcedinto
flexionattwopoints.Themostsignificantof theseis thecephalicflexureinthemidbrainre-
gion.Itis soseverethatitcreates almosta180-degreebendintheneuraxis andpushes thehy-
pothalamus ventraltothediencephalon.Asecond,less severeflexionis foundinthehind-
brain.
7

This is aphotograph ofasagittalsection ofamouseembryo(E13.5)with an overlayshow-
ingthesubdivions ofthedevelopningnervous system.Theimageis taken fromtherefer-
enceatrlas developedbyLuis Puelles as partof theAllen DevelopingMouseBrainAtlas
createdbytheAllen Institutefor Brain Science.
Lackof appreciationofthesignificanceof thecephalicflexurehas ledtotragicmisinterpreta-
tionof therelationships betweenparts oftheforebrain,particularlythebeliefthatthehypo-
thalamus is simplysomekindof ventraladditiontothethalamus.
Regionalisationinthespinalcord
Thespinalcordis traditionallydividedintoanumber ofsegments relatedtotheemergenceof
individualspinalnerves.Thepresenceof avertebrabetweeneachpairofspinalnerves gives
theimpressionthatthespinalcordis asegmentedstructure,butthis is anillusion,andthe
roots of thespinalnerves runinacontinuous stripalongthecordinsidethevertebralcanal.
Ontheotherhand,thereis clear evidencefromanatomicaland hoxgeneexpressionstudies
thatthespinalcordoffour-limbedvertebrates canbedividedintosixdistinctfunctionalre-
gions -prebrachial(C1-C4),brachial(C5-T1),postbrachial((T2-L1),crural(L2-S1),postcru-
ral(S2-S4),andcaudal(S5-Co2).Thebrachialandcruralregions containthemotorneurons
8

thatsupplythelimbmuscles oftheupperandlower limbs,respectively.Thepostbrachialand
postcruralparts containthepreganglionicneurons of thesympatheticandspinalparasympa-
theticsystems,respectively.Theprebrachialregioncontains themotorneurons supplyingthe
cervicalmuscles,andthecaudalregioncontains motorneurons supplyingthetailmuscles.
Neuralcrest
Justaftertheclosureoftheneuraltube,agroupof cells migrates awayfromthedorsalsurface
oftheneuraltubetoformacolumnoneither side,calledtheneuralcrest.Theneuralcrest
cells giverisetobothneurons (theganglioncells of theautonomicnervous systemandthe
sensorydorsalrootganglioncells of cranialandspinalnerves)andnon-neuralelements such
as themelanocytes oftheskinand(surprisingly)thebones andmuscles oftheface.The
melanocytes migratelongdistances toreachallareas oftheskinsurface.
Developmentoftheperipheralnervous system
Theperipheralnervous systemis madeupofthreecomponents –theaxons ofmotorneurons
thatconnecttomuscles,thedorsalrootganglioncells andtheirlongaxons,whichreachsen-
soryreceptors,andthegangliaandpostganglionicaxons ofthesympatheticandparasympa-
theticganglioncells.Itis importanttonotethattheopticandolfactorynerves arenotpartof
theperipheralnervous systemsincetheyaredirectoutgrowths oftheforebrain,withmyelin
producedbyoligodendrocytes insteadofSchwanncells.
Theelements oftheperipheralnervous systemareprimarilydistributedbycranialnerves 3-12
andbythespinalnerves.Inbothcranialandspinalnerves,theaxons ofmotorneurons grow
outuntiltheyreachtheirtargetmuscle.
Adultneurogenesis
Someparts ofthematuremammalianbrain,notablythehippocampus,thecerebellum,andthe
olfactorybulb,canactuallygeneratenew neurons.Inmostotherareas ofthebrain,itseems
neuroplasticityappears tobesolelytheresultof themassivereorganisationofsynapticnet-
works inresponsetonew demands.
Migrationofneurons
Inmanyparts ofthebrain, neurons continuetodevelopintheplacewheretheywerefirst
formed.Theseneurons maysendtheir axons toother areas inthebrain,buttheneuronalcell
bodies donotmove.However,inafew places inthebrain,groups ofneurons migratefrom
theirplaceofbirthtoreachtheirfinallocation.Inthecerebralcortex,mostneurons aregener-
atedatthesurfaceoftheventricleandmigrateoutwardtofindthecorticallayerinwhichthey
willfinallyreside.Mostoftheneurons thatmigratetowardthesurfaceofthebrain(radialmi-
gration) arethefuturepyramidalandstellateneurons ofthecortex,bothofwhichareexcita-
toryglutamatergicneurons.Ontheotherhand,thesmallGABAergicinhibitoryneurons of
thecortexariseinthebaseof theforebrainandmigratetangentiallytoreachtheirfinalsettle-
mentinthecortex,sothefinalstructureis theproductoflargemigrations movingatrightan-
gles toeachother.TheGABAneurons constitute20% ofthecorticalneurons inmammals.
Thelargestmigrationofneurons inthebrainbegins intherostralpartoftherhombiclip,
whichborders therostralendof thefourthventricleofthehindbrain.Mostoftherhombiclip
cells migratedorsallyintothedevelopingcerebellum,whilesmallernumbers migrateven-
trallyintothelongitudinalpartofthehindbrain.Thosethatmigrateintothecerebellumform
thetinygranulecells thateventuallymakeup70% ofalltheneurons inthebrain.Becauseof
this,therhombiclipis now recognisedas themostactivecellgenerationareainthedevelop-
ingnervous system.
Thewidedispersalofneurons andmelanocytes fromtheneuralcrestconstitutes anotherma-
jorneuralmigrationduring development.Theprocess bywhichthecrestcells detachand
movethroughtissueinvolves manygenes,someof whichareimplicatedincancermetastasis.
9

Formationofsynapses
Developingneurons sproutthinoutgrowths calledprocesses,whichconnectwithothernerve
cells ormusclecells.Theconnections theymake,generallybetweenanaxonprocess onthe
sendingsideandadendriteprocess onthereceivingside,arecalledsynapses.Muchoftheba-
sicwiringofthebrainstemandspinalcordis laiddownearlyinfetaldevelopment.These
earlyconnections arethoserequiredforsurvivalas theycontrolbreathingandswallowing.
Thereis noroomforerrorhere,andthesevitalconnections areformedaccordingtoastrict
program.Thefirstmovements ofthefetus earlyinpregnancyinhumans areclearevidenceof
theformationofearlyconnections betweenneurons andmusclecells.Inmice,theconnec-
tions withmuscles aremadeafter only12days ofembryonicdevelopment,buttheseconnec-
tions arenotmadeuntilabout12weeks inhumans.
Thesecondcategoryofconnections starts lateinfetaldevelopmentandextends intochild-
hoodandadultlife.Theselaterconnections areless rigidlyprogrammed,andtheyaremade
whilethenewbornmammalinteracts withits environmentandis learningnew skills.Thepe-
riodinwhich this typeofplasticityis mostactiveis termedthe"sensitiveperiod" forsensory
andmotorsystems andincludes ashorter "criticalperiod" duringwhichthefundamentalor-
ganisationis determined.Itwas formerlybelievedthattheformationofnew connections
stoppedsometimesoonafterbirth,butitis now knownthatnew connections areanormal
partofthegrowthofallbrains throughoutlife.Theabilityofthebraintoconstantlyformnew
connections andtoreshapepatterns ofconnectioninresponsetonew informationis referred
toas plasticity.Theplasticityof thehumanbrainis remarkable.Ithas beenestimatedthatthe
brainforms anaverageofamillionnew connections perminutethroughoutthewholeoflife.
Axonguidance
Anaxonthatgrows outfromaneuronwillonlybefunctionallysuccessfulifitconnects with
thecorrecttargetcell.Themechanismthathelps itfindits correcttargetis calledaxonguid-
ance,oraxonpathfinding.Manygrowingaxons havebeenfoundtobeextraordinarilyaccu-
rateinfindingtherightpathtotheirtarget.Insomecases,theaxons neurons findtheirproper
partnerbecausetheysticktomatchingmolecules onthesurfaceofotheraxons orhaverecep-
tors sensitivetomolecules madebytheir targets,whicharebothcontrolledbyacommon
gene.For example,motorneuronclusters inthespinalcordandthemusclegrouptowhich
theyconnecthavebeenshowntoshareaspecificgenemarker.Axonguidanceworks bya
process of stepwiserefinement:First,thegrowingaxonfollows ageneralpathway,bundling
withsimilaraxons andobeyinggeneralroutingcues (towhichitmayormaynotbesensitive)
suchas crossingthemidline.Thenuponnearingits destination,itdetects morespecificchem-
icalsignals fromits target.Agenepairingsystemlikethis,encodingattractantmolecules and
thereceptors whichrespondtothem,alsoexists inthehindbrainneurongroups thatconnect
toparticularcells inthecerebellum.
Whateverthemechanisms, theformationofearlyconnections is remarkablyaccurateandreli-
able,sothatbrains arealways initiallywiredupinthesameway.Thegrowingaxon's tipis a
veryactiveenlargedareacalledagrowthcone.Thegrowthconeis ahighlymobilestructure
thatappears tofeelits waythroughtissue,detectingveryfaintchemicalsignals thatleaditto-
wards its targets orwhichsteer itawayfromunwantedconnections.Thesigns maybefixedin
place,likesignposts,ormaybedistributedover longdistances,likethebreadcrumbs leftbe-
hindbyHanselandGretel.
10

Agrowth coneatthetipofan axon fromaratdorsalrootganglion neuron in cellculture.
Stainingfor actin (green)outlines theflattenedlamellipodium,with numerous finefilopo-
diaextendingtoexploretheenvironmet.Microtubules (red)filltheaxon andextendinto
thecentrallamellipodium,thesiteof activegrowth.In vivo,thegrowth conewouldhavea
three-dimensionalruffledshape.Imagecourtesyof MichaelThompson andDr.LisaFoa,
UniversityofTasmania,Australia.
Atthestagewhenneurons arematuringandsendingoutaxons tomakecontactwithother
neurons,thedevelopingnervous systemsecretes atapestryofguidancemolecules thatattract
andrepel,definingpathways,markingcrossingpoints,andidentifyingdestinations.Growing
axons explorethis spacewiththeirgrowthcones,respondingtosomecues andignoringoth-
ers,accordingtothereceptors theycarry.Axons fromdiverseregions convergeonshared
pathways andthenbranchouttodistincttargets as theyencounterindividualcues.Several
guidancemolecules havebeenidentified,andtheir functions havebeenanalysedindetail;
theyincludenetrins,semaphorins,andSlitproteins.Oncetheyreachtheirtargets,axons stop
growingbecausetheyencounter cellsurfacemolecules thatturnoffgrowthandstimulate
synapticformation.
Thesestopsignals varyinconcentration,soarrivingaxons mayfanoutacross thetargettissue
inanorganisedgradient.Inthecaseofephrins andEphreceptors,someaxons willhavefew
Ephreceptors,andsomewillhavemany.If theyencounteratissuewithagradientofephrins
expressed,axons withmanyreceptors willstoprespondingtosmallconcentrations ofephrins.
Incontrast,thosewithfew receptors willpushpastlow-ephrinareas andstopwhenthe
ephrins becomemoreconcentrated.SincetheEphreceptors andephrins areregulatedbyge-
neticgradients inthetargetandtheoriginoftheaxons respectively,this simplemechanism
preserves topographicarrangements across longdistances.
Synapsepruningandnervecelldeath
Notallofthesenew connections workas wellas theyshould,andmillions ofsynapses are
prunedduringearlybraindevelopmentsothatthematuresystems formedareaccurateandef-
ficient.Ingeneral,mostsystems follow apatternof beingover-connectedinitially,whichis
thenrefinedbypruning,whichcontinues throughoutlife.Thesamepruningprocess is applied
toneurons:manyarekilled off duringdevelopment,specificallythosethathavemadepoor
connections orareotherwiseunnecessary.Thesewaves ofsynapticpruningandneuronal
deatharepartoftheprocess ofbuildinganefficientnervous system.As withsynapses,the
pruningof cells andaxonbranches continues throughoutlife.
Criticalperiods infetaldevelopment
Certaindevelopmentalinsults cancausedevastatingdamagetothedevelopingbrainand
spinalcord.Theseincludevitamindeficiency(neuraltubedefect),alcohol(fetalalcoholsyn-
drome),iodinedeficiency,andinfections (rubella).Eachoneofthesecancausewidespread
11

damagetothefetalbrain.Itis possiblethatviralinfections mayalsocausecerebralpalsydur-
ingpregnancy.
Neuraltubedefects (NTD),themostcommonofwhichis calledspinabifida,arecausedbya
disruptionoftheveryearlydevelopmentoftheneuraltube,withincompleteclosureatthe
rostraland/orcaudalends.Themostcommonplaceforincompleteclosureis inthecaudal
partofthespinalcord,andinthemostseverecases,thedamagetothespinalcordresults in
paralysis ofthelowerlimbandloss ofcontrolofthebladderandbowel.Somefamilies havea
geneticpredispositiontoNTD,butthemostcriticalfactoris alackofthevitaminfolate.
Sincetheriskperiodoccurs beforeapparentsigns of pregnancy,allwomenwhomightbe-
comepregnantshouldmakesurethattheirfolateintakeis high–eitherbyeatingleafyvegeta-
bles andotherfolate-richfoods or bytakingfolatevitamintablets as wellasupplement.In
manycountries,breadflourandbreakfastcereals areenrichedwithfolatetoensurethatthe
wholepopulationhas adequatefolatelevels.
Alcoholconsumptionbywomeninthefirsteightweeks ofpregnancycanhavedevastating
effects onearlybraindevelopment,andthechildmay bebornwithsignificantdeficiencies in
brainfunction.Theconditionis calledfetalalcoholsyndrome.
Withinthefirstthreemonths ofpregnancy,rubellainfection(Germanmeasles)cancausema-
jorbrainabnormalities,includingdeafness andblindness.
IntheWest,itis notwidelyappreciatedthatiodinedeficiencyduringfetaldevelopmentis the
mostimportantcauseofintellectualdisabilityworldwide.Butitis stillaffectingmillions of
childreninmountainous areas ofAsia,SoutheastAsia,andsouth-easternAustralia,whereio-
dinehas beenleechedoutof thesoil.Iodinedeficiencyresults inhypothyroidismthatperma-
nentlydamages thedevelopingbrainbyaffectingkey genes forconnectivity.Theproblemof
iodinedeficiencyis easilyremediedwiththesupplyofiodinesupplements insaltandoil,but
this is notalways easytoachievebecauseof logisticimpediments.
Criticalperiods duringpostnataldevelopment
Morethansixtyyears ago, itwas shownthatkittens thathadoneeyekeptclosedduringapar-
ticularperiodafterbirthwereunabletodevelopbinocularvisionsubsequently.This ledtoa
theorythatonemustreceiveaspecificsensoryinputwithinalimitedperiodforapartofthe
braintodevelopnormally.This concepthadamajorimpactontheories ofpostnataldevelop-
ment.Inparticular,itraisedserious concerns thatchildrendeprivedofaparticularstimulus or
environmentforashortperiodintheirlifemightbedeprivedforeverofsomevitalcapability.
However,this view has notbeensupportedbycontemporaryevidence,anditis now feltthat
theconceptshouldbeappliedmoreloosely.Themodernversionofthis conceptargues that
criticalperiods aretheidealtimeformostchildrento receiveaparticularinput.However,it
accepts thatdelayedinputs canstillbeeffective.For this reason,theterm'sensitiveperiods' is
commonlyusedtodenotelonger timeintervals duringwhichexperiencecanshapethener-
vous system.Sensitiveperiods duringhumanpostnataldevelopmentthathavereceivedpartic-
ularattentionarethoseforlanguageacquisition(mainlyninemonths tofiveyears),develop-
mentofemotionalcontrol(frombirthtotwoyears),motorcontrol(frombirthtoeightyears),
andhabitualways ofresponding,suchas enthusiasmandpersistence(fromsixmonths totwo
years).
Later processes thatrefinethestructureof thebrain
Thedevelopmentofthebraindoes notstopinchildhood.As notedabove,theformationof
new synapses continues throughoutlife.Inthecerebralcortex,this is accompaniedbythe
continuedgrowthofdendrites.Frombirthtoadulthood,themass ofthecortexincreases five-
foldwithoutanynew cells forming–anincreasealmostentirelyduetodendritegrowth.It
has beenshownthatthereis amarkedincreaseinnew synapsegrowthinthefrontallobes
duringadolescencesothatthefrontallobes arenotfullymatureuntilabout25years ofage.
Another vitalprocess thatoccurs duringchildhoodandadolescenceis thatofprogressive
myelination.Myelinsheaths arelaiddownduringthepostnatalyears untilearlyadulthood.
Myelinationincreases thespeedoftransmissionofactionpotentials alongaxons.This might
12

provideamechanismforstabilisingconnectiontimes whilethebodyenlarges.Thedistance
fromthespinalcordtothefootmuscles increases fromabout300mminababytoabout1000
mminanadult;ifmyelinationdidnotoccur,itcould takethirtytimes as longforacommand
toreachthemuscles inanadult.
Thedevelopmentofthecerebellumis delayedcomparedwithotherparts ofthebrain.Atthe
timeof birth,thecerebellumis extremelysmall,butduringthefirstsixyears oflifeinhu-
mans,itgrows tothesizeofanorange.Thecerebellum's roleis toassistwiththecoordination
ofmovement,soits developmentis delayedsothatitmatches theperiodwhenthechildis
learningnew motorskills.
Neuralplasticity
Neuralplasticityrefers totheabilityofthematurebraintochangeitselfbygeneratingnew
neurons orbymakingnew connections.Therealisationthatthebraincancontinuallychange
itself is quitenew;ithas ledtosignificantchanges inneurosciencethinking.Inthepast,itwas
thoughtthatthestructureof thematuremammalianbraincouldnotbechangedsothatsome-
onewhosufferedastroke, orsomeotherformofbraininjurywouldbecondemnedtoaper-
manentloss offunction.However,since1990ithas becomeevidentthatthebraincancom-
pensatebycreatingmajorchanges inconnections afterinjury,andmanyrehabilitationpro-
grams havebeendevelopedtotakeadvantageof this capacity.
Theabilityto grow andmakenew connections is notrestrictedtoinjuredbrains -italsooc-
curs innormalbrains asked tocopewithlargeamounts ofnew information.Forexample,an
MRI studyofthebrains of final-year medicalstudents foundthatthegreymatterintheirpari-
etalcortexandhippocampus increasedsubstantiallyin theperiodleadinguptotheirfinalex-
ams.
Apioneerintheareaofneuroplasticity,MikeMerzenich,has promotedtheideathatexercis-
ingthebraincanincreaseits capacityas adefenceagainstcognitivedeteriorationinelderly
individuals.
Questions forrepetition
- How manygenes areinvolvedinthedevelopmentofthemammalianbrain?
- How long does thematurationof thefrontalcortextake?
- Inwhichbrainareas does adultneurogenesis takeplacetoanynotableextent?
- Whatarethecomponents oftheperipheralnervous system?
- Whatarethenamesofthesignallingmoleculesthatorientventrallyordorsallyoftheneural
tube?
- WherearethefirstfourHoxgenes expressed?
- Whatis oneofthemainreasons for neuraltubedefects?
13

THE SPINAL CORD
Spinal Cord
Thecentralnervous systemconsists oftheforebrain,brainstem,andspinalcord.Thefore-
brainis comprisedofthecerebralhemispheres,olfactorystructures,hypothalamus,anddien-
cephalon.Thebrainstemconsists of themidbrain(mesencephalon)andthehindbrain
(rhombencephalon),comprising12segments.
Thespinalcordis thesimplestpartof thecentralnervous systemcontaining:
- sensoryneurons thatreceivesensationfromthesensoryreceptors
- motorneurons thatcontrolmuscles
- longtracts connectingthespinalcordwiththebrain
- thepreganglionicnucleioftheautonomicnervous system
- patterngenerators forcomplexmovements suchas runningatdifferentspeeds
Thespinalcordis alongcylindricalstructureextendingfromthebaseoftheskulltothefirst
lumbarvertebrainthehuman.Thespinalcordis noticeablythickerintheregions thatare
connectedtotheupperandlowerlimb.
In this photograph ofmousespinalcord,thethickenedregions representtheareas ofat-
tachmentoftheupper and lower limbnerves.
Inatransversesectionofthespinalcord,acentralbutterfly-shapedareaofgreymatteris sur-
roundedbywhitematter.Thegreymatter is dividedintoventralanddorsalhorns,andthe
whitemattercanbedividedintothreefuniculi(columns)–dorsal,lateralandventral.
Thegreymattercanbefurthersubdividedintoaseries oflayers calledthelaminaeofRexed.
Layers 1to4formthedorsalhornandarerelatedtosensoryinput.Layers 7to9formthe
ventralhornandhavefunctions generallytothemotorsystem,whilethelimbandtrunkmotor
neurons arelocatedinlamina9.Inbetweenthedorsalandventralhorns lies thelamina5,
whichis thesiteofpatterngenerators for limbmovements.Lamina6is smallandis not
presentatalllevels.
14

Schematictransversesection through thespinalcord.
Schematictransversesection through thespinalcordshowingimportantlaminae.
Thespinalcordreceives sensoryinformationfromtheskin,joints,andinternalorgans;this
informationis processedlocallyandsenttothebrain.Themotorneurons inthespinalcord
connectwiththemuscles,bloodvessels,andinternalorgans andcaninitiateactivityinthese
structures.Thebrainsends nervefibrebundles (tracts)tocontrolthesemotorneurons.
Themammalianspinalcordis madeupof sixdistinctanatomicalandfunctionalregions–one
fortheneck(prebrachial),onefortheforelimb(brachial),oneforthesympatheticoutflow
(postbrachial),oneforthelowerlimb(crural),onefor thepelvicparasympatheticoutflow
(postcrural),andalastonefor thetail(caudal).
Inthehuman,theprebrachialregionextends fromspinalcordsegments C1toC4,thebrachial
regionfromC5toT1,thepostbrachialregionfromT2 toL2,thecruralregionfromL3toS1,
thepostcruralregionfromS2toS4,andthecaudalregionfromS5tothecoccygealsegments.
Thespinalcordcontains sophisticatedpatterngenerators thatcaninitiatedifferentkinds of
coordinatedmovements.Movementpatterns generatedinthespinalcordincludelocomotion,
posture,andbalancing.
15

Motorneurons inthespinalcord
Motorneurons initiatemusclefibrecontractionandsecretionofglands,actingas thefinal
commonpathwayformotorfunction's centralandperipheralneuralpathways.Themotorneu-
rons inthespinalcordbelongtotwomajor functionalgroups –somaticandautonomic.So-
maticmotorneurons innervateskeletal(voluntary) musclewhileautonomicmotorneurons in-
nervatesmoothmuscleandglands.
Somaticmotorneurons arelocatedintheventralhornofthegreyofthespinalcordinlamina
9.Thesearelargemultipolar neurons thatstainwellwithacetylcholinesteraseandNeuN
markers.
Atransversesection ofmammalian spinalcordstainedfor NeuN showingupper limbmo-
tor neurons (MN)in lamina9oftheventralhorn.
Thelamina9motorneurons arelargebecausetheyeachsupportaverylongaxonthatruns to
supplythestriatedmuscles of theaxialskeleton(muscles oftheneck,trunk,andtail)andthe
muscles oftheupperandlower limbs.Themotor neurons innervatingaxialmuscles are
presentatallspinalcordlevels.Still,thelargemotor neurons innervatinglimbmuscles are
onlypresentattheleveloforiginoftheupperlimbnerves (C5toT1spinalcordsegments in
thehuman)andtheleveloforiginof thelower limbnerves (L3toS1spinalcordsegments in
thehuman).
Theautonomicmotorneurons ofthespinalcordcanbedividedintotwoseparategroups–the
preganglionicmotorneurons of thesympatheticnervous systemandthepreganglionicmotor
neurons ofthepelvicparasympatheticsystem.
16

In humans,thesympatheticpreganglionicmotor neurons arefoundattheT2toL2spinal
cord,andtheparasympatheticpreganglionicmotor neurons arelocatedfromS2toS4
spinalcordsegments.
Spinalcordnerveroots
Adorsalandventralrootconnects eachspinalnervetothespinalcord.Theventralrootcon-
tains theaxons ofmotorneurons,andthedorsalrootcontains sensoryaxons.Thecellbodies
ofthesensory axons arelocatedinthedorsalrootganglion,whichforms aswellingattached
tothedorsalroot.
Overviewspinalnerveroots.
Thespinalnerves
Thespinalnerves arenamedfor thevertebraadjacenttotheirexit,butthenamingconvention
changes fromcervicaltothoracicandlower levels.Inthecervicalregion,thenerves are
namedfor thevertebralbodybelow theirexitsothatC1exits abovetheC1vertebra,C2
abovetheC2vertebra,andsoon.However,inthethoracicandlowervertebrallevels,the
emergingnerves arenamedforthevertebralbodyabovetheirlevelofexitsothatT1exits be-
low theT1vertebra,T2below theT2vertebra,andsoon.This creates aproblemforthenerve
identityemergingbetween theC7vertebraandtheT1vertebrasinceitdoes notfiteitherof
thesedefinitions.Thesolutionwas tonamethis nervetheC8nerve,eventhoughthereis no
C8vertebra.Theresultis thatthehumanhas 7cervicalvertebraeand8cervicalspinalnerves.
17

Schematicoverviewofthespinalnerves.
Below thecervicalregion, thereare12thoracicvertebraeand12thoracicspinalnerves,5
lumbarvertebraeand5lumbarspinalnerves,5sacralvertebraeand5sacralspinalnerves.
Thenumberoftail(coccygeal) vertebraevaries fromonetotwo.
Theforelimb muscles aresuppliedbynerves fromthebrachialplexus,formedbytheC5,C6,
C7,C8,andT1spinalnerves.Thehindlimbmuscles aresuppliedbythelumbosacralplexus,
formedbytheL2,L3,L4, L5,andS1spinalnerves.
Dermatomes
Eachspinalnervesupplies aspecificstripof skinfromthemiddleofthebacktotheventral
midline.Theskinareaprovidedbyasinglespinalnerveis calledadermatome.This diagram
shows thedistributionofthespinaldermatomes fromC5toS1.
Thedermatomes ofthehuman body.
18

Spinalcordtracts
Descendingtracts inthespinalcord
Descendingtracts ariseinthecerebralcortexandthebrainstem.Mostdescendingtracts cross
inthebrainstemandthendescendineitherthelateralorventralfuniculus ofthespinalcord.
Thedescendingtracts terminateoninterneurons inlaminae5,6,and7,motorneurons inlam-
ina9,orboth.Infunctionalterms,ausefuldistinctioncanbemadebetweenthedescending
tracts inthelateralfuniculus andthoseintheventralfuniculus:thelateralfuniculus tracts
(corticospinal,rubrospinal,lateralreticulospinal) aremoreconcernedwiththecontrolof
flexormovements andparticularlymovements ofthedistalparts ofthelimbs,whereas thede-
scendingtracts oftheventralfuniculus (vestibulospinal,tectospinal,medialreticulospinal)are
moreconcernedwiththecontrolof extensor(postural)muscles ofthetrunkandproximal
parts ofthelimbs.Thecorticospinaltracttravels fromthemotorcortexthroughtheinternal
capsule,pons,andpyramid toreachthepyramidaldecussation,crossingtotheoppositeside.
Schematicoverviewofthecoricospinaltract.
Theinternalcapsulestripofwhitematter inthecerebralhemisphereis acommonsiteofdam-
agetothecorticospinaltractinhumans,whereahaemorrhageorbloodclotcancausea
stroke.Aninternalcapsulestrokeresults inparalysis andstiffness inthemuscles oftheoppo-
sitesideof thebody.
Inprimates,somecorticospinalfibres makedirectcontactwithmotorneurons inlamina9.
Still,directconnections fromthecerebralcortextomotorneurons arerareorabsentinnon–
primatemammals.Thecorticalcontrolof limbmovements innon–primatemammals is
mainlybasedonamajorprojectiontolamina5inthespinalcord,whichcontains ahighlyor-
ganizedsystemoflimbmovementpatterngenerators (Levineetal.,2014).
Somebrainstemcentres sendtracts tothespinalcord.Thesearetherednucleus (rubrospinal
tract),superiorcolliculus (tectospinaltract),vestibularnuclei(vestibulospinaltracts),and
reticular nuclei(reticulospinaltracts).
Ascendingtracts inthespinalcord
Boththespinothalamictracts andthedorsalcolumns (gracileandcuneatefasciculi)convey
somatosensoryinformationfromonesideof thebodytothecerebralcortexoftheopposite
sideviathethalamus.Eachofthesesystems is basicallyachainofthreeneurons:thefirst
19

neuronis adorsalrootganglioncellwithits centralprocess enteringthespinalcordtoascend
forsomedistancebeforeitsynapses withthesecondneuroneinthechain;theaxonofthesec-
ondneuroncrosses themidlineimmediatelyandclimbs tothethalamus;thethirdneuron
sends its axonfromthethalamus tothecerebralcortex.
Schematicoverviewofsensorypathways.
Itis importanttonotethatthecentralprocess ofthefirstneuroninthespinothalamicsystem
is short(its axonascends foronlyafew spinalcordsegments).However,themainprocess of
thefirstneuronofthedorsalcolumnsystemascends allthewaytothemedullaoblongata.
Thefirstneuronofthespinothalamicsystemascends inthedorsolateralfasciculus (justexter-
naltolamina1),andthecellbodyofthesecondneuronmaylieinlamina1,2,3,or4.
Theaxonofthesecondspinothalamicneuroncrosses themidlineintheanteriorwhitecom-
missureof thespinalcord. Itthenascends ineither thelateralspinothalamicpathway(pain
andtemperaturesensation) ortheanteriorspinothalamictract(touchsensation).
Thedorsalcolumntracts carrytouch,deeppressure,proprioceptive,andvibrationsenseinfor-
mationinthegracileandcuneatefasciculi-thegracilefasciculus mainlyconveys information
fromthehindlimb,andthecuneatefasciculus conveys informationfromtheforelimb.Note
thatthesetwopathways donotcross themidlineuntiltheyreachthebrainstem.
Thespinocerebellar tracts
Thedorsalspinocerebellarandventralspinocerebellartracts conveypositionsense(proprio-
ception)andtactileinformationtothecerebellum.Thesetracts endonthesamesideas they
began.As withtheotherascendingfibresystems,thefirstneuronofthedorsalspinocerebellar
andventralspinocerebellarsystems is adorsalrootganglioncell.Inthecaseofthedorsal
spinocerebellarsystem,thefirstneuronends bysynapsingonneurons ofthedorsalnucleus
(thenucleus ofClarke),whichis aprominentcellgroupfoundinthoracicandupperlumbar
levels (notethatthesearethesamelevels atwhichthepreganglioniccolumnofthesympa-
theticnervous systemis located).Thedorsalnucleus lies justdorsolateraltothecentralcanal.
Theaxons ofthesecells formthedorsalspinocerebellartractinthelateralfuniculus andend
inthecerebellarcortexofthesameside.Theventralspinocerebellarsystemis morecompli-
20

catedanatomically,but,in general,itis similartothedorsalspinocerebellarsystemsinceit
ends inthecerebellumofthesameside.Boththedorsalspinocerebellarandventralspinocere-
bellarsystems serveonlythebody's rearhalf;thebody's fronthalfis servedbyanadditional
spinocerebellarsystemcalledtheexternalcuneatesystem.
Schematicoverviewofthespinocerebellar tracts.
Questions forrepetition
-Whichlaminaeofthespinalcordaremainlyassociatedwithmotorfunctions?
-Whichbrainareais frequentlyaffectedbystrokes?Whataretheconsequences?
-Whichneurons constitutethespinalcord?
-Whatsensoryinformationis transmittedinthedorsalcolumns ofthespinalcord?
-Fromwhichspinalcordsegments dothepreganglionicsympatheticnerves originate?
21

THE BRAIN STEM
Brain stem
Thebrainstemis madeup oftwoparts,themidbrain(mesencephalon)andthehindbrain
(rhombencephalon).Themidbrainis continuous withtheforebrain,andthehindbrainis con-
tinuous withthespinalcord.
Inoldertextbooks,thebrainstemis dividedintothreeparts:midbrain,pons,andmedullaob-
longata.Unfortunately,this schema,basedonanow outdatedview ofhumanbrainanatomy,
is misleadingandinaccurate.Theconfusionrelates tothemushroom–likeexpansionofthe
pons inthehumanbrainsothatitappears tobeginadjacenttothemidbrainandextendtohalf
thelengthofthehindbrain.Thetruenatureof themammalianpons is explainedintheChap-
teronbrainsegmentation.Inthemeantime,westronglyrecommendthatyouusetheterms
'midbrain' and'hindbrain' tosubdividethebrainstem.
Thebrainstemserves anumber ofkeyfunctions:
-thecontrolofthemuscles oftheeye,face,mouth,andthroat;controlofthesalivary
andlacrimalglands;
-controloftheinternalorgans ofthethoraxandabdomen;
-receivingsensationfromtheface,mouth,andthroat,includingtaste;
-receivingsensationfromthespecialsenseorgans forvision,hearingandbalance;
-coordinationofmovementofthelimbs andtrunk
-centers forcontrolofbreathing,micturition,anddefecation;
-centers formaintenanceofalertness;
-actingas acorridorforlongmotor andsensorypathways thatconnectthebrainwith
thespinalcord;
-andas aplaceoforiginof descendingmotorpathways.
Thebrainstemis connectedwiththemuscles andsensoryorgans oftheheadthroughten
pairs ofcranialnerves (cranialnerves 3to12).Thereis aseparatechapterdetailingthe
anatomyand connections ofthebrainstemcranialnerves.
Thebrainstemhas abasiccylindricalstructure,buttherearemajoroutgrowths fromthedor-
salsurface.Inthemidbrain,thesedorsaloutgrowths arecalledthesuperiorandinferiorcolli-
culi–twopairs ofroundedbumps thatarereceivingcenters forvisualpathways (thesuperior
colliculi)andauditorypathways (theinferior colliculi).Thelargeoutgrowthfromthehind-
brainis thecerebellum.Duringearlydevelopment,thecerebellumgrows outoftherostral
partofthehindbrain,justcaudaltothemidbrain.
22

Asagittalsection through thebrain of amarmosetmonkeyshowingthemidbrain andhind-
brain.Thecerebellumis alargeoutgrowth connectedtothedorsalsurfaceofthehind-
brain.Thetworoundedstructures on thedorsalsurfaceofthemidbrain arethesuperior
andinferior colliculi.
BRAIN STEM SECTIONS STAINED FORMYELIN
Thenextsectioninvolves theexaminationof images ofhumanbrainstemandtheidentifica-
tionof majorstructures inthesesections.Wewillfirstlookatthemainfeatures ofbrainstem
sections insummaryandthenlookatdetails withineachsection.Thesections shownhereare
stainedtoshow myelinated fibers inordertopresentaclearpictureofthemainpathways in
thebrainstem.Groups ofneurons (nuclei)donotstainandappearas paleareas inthesesec-
tions.
23

SECTIONSTHROUGHTHECAUDALHINDBRAIN
Thecaudalendofthehumanbrainstemis basicallysimilartosections ofthecervicalspinal
cord.However,aseries ofimportanttractrelocations changes theappearanceas weascend
throughthehindbrain.Themainchanges arethefollowing:
-Therelocationofthecorticospinaltractfromits lateralpositioninthespinalcord
toaventralpositioninthepyramidof theoppositeside.Thecorticospinaltractis a
descendingtract,butherewearefollowingitinreverse.
Caudalhuman hindbrain atthelevelof thepyramidaldecussation.
-Theterminationofthegracileandcuneatefasciculiinthegracileandcuneate
nuclei–aftersynapsing,this pathwaycontinues bycrossingthemidline(internal
arcuatefibers)toreachapositiondorsaltothepyramid-thenewlyformedcrossed
tractis calledthemediallemniscus.Themediallemniscus travels rostrallytoreach
thethalamus.
Hindbrain atthelevelofthegracileandcuneatenucleiandthesomatosensorydecussation.
24

-Afterall,thegracileandcuneatefibers havesynapsed,andthesecondaxonhas
crossedthemidlinetoreachthemediallemniscus,thedorsalregionofthebrain
stemis progressivelyvacateduntilnothingis left–theremainingspaceis occu-
piedbythefourthventricle.
Thehindbrain atthelevelofthecaudalendof thefourth ventricle.Themostoutstanding
featurehereis theinferior olive.
-Thecaudalendofthefourthventricleis onlyathintubethatis continuous with
thecentralcanal,butitexpands inmorerostralsections tocoverthewholedorsal
surfaceofthehindbrain.
Thehindbrain atthelevelofthemiddleof thefourth ventricle.
THEPRECEREBELLARNUCLEIANDTHECEREBELLARPEDUNCLES
Therostralhindbraingives risetothecerebellum,whichexpands tocovermostofthedorsal
surfaceof thehindbrain.Threelargenucleiinthehindbrainprojecttothecerebellum.They
aretheexternalcuneatenucleus,theinferiorolive,andthebasilarpontinenuclei,andarecol-
lectivelyreferredtoas precerebellar nuclei.Thefibers travellingfromtheinferioroliveand
25

thepontinenucleicross themidlinetoreachthecerebellum.Becausethepontinenucleiare
huge,this crossingforms amassiveoutgrowthontheventralsurfaceofthehindbrain.
Thefibers travellingfromthehindbraintothecerebellumformtwothickbundles calledthe
inferiorandmiddlecerebellarpeduncles.Theinferiorcerebellarpedunclecontains the
crossedolivocerebellarfibers.
Hindbrain attheleveloftherostralpartof theinferior olive.
Therostralhindbraincontains thebasilar pontinenuclei.Theaxons fromthesenucleicross
themidlinetoformthehugemiddlecerebellar peduncle.
Rostralhindbrain showingthepontinenucleiandthemiddlecerebellar peduncles.
Theexternalcuneatenucleus receives positionsenseinformationfromtheupperlimband
neckandsends this informationtothecerebellumof thesameside.Theexternalcuneatenu-
cleus is locatedmedialtotheinferiorcerebellar peduncle.
26

Theexternalcuneatenucleus lies justmedialtothedarkinferior cerebellar peduncleatthe
dorsolateralcorner oftherostralhindbrain.
Theinferioroliveis alarge,foldednucleus intherostralhalfofthecaudalhindbrain.
Theinferior oliveforms a distinctivebulgeon theventralsurfaceofthehindbrain,lateral
tothepyramid.
Axons of inferiorolivecells traveltotheoppositecerebellarhemisphereviatheinferiorcere-
bellarpeduncle,wheretheyprovidetimingsignals for coordinationofmovement.
Thebasilar pontinenucleiconstitutethelargestgroupofneurons inthehumanbrainstem.
Theyreceiveinputfromthecerebralcortexandsendtheiraxons totheoppositecerebellar
hemisphere.Thefibers leavingthepontinenucleiformthemiddlecerebellarpeduncle.The
pontinenucleiandthecrossingpontocerebellarfibers formamassivebulgewhichcovers
mostof therostralhindbrain,seeninimages inthesectionabove.
SECTIONS OFTHEROSTRALHINDBRAIN SHOWINGTHEPONTINEEXPANSION
Next,wewillexaminesections of therostralhindbrain,wherethedominantfeatureis the
pontineexpansion.Themostusefullandmarkinidentifyingthelevelofthesesections is the
fourthventricle.Thefourthventricleis widestatthecaudalendofthepontineexpansion,and
itbecomes progressivelynarrow as itapproaches themidbrain,whereitforms thetube-like
aqueduct.
27

Cerebrospinalfluidfromtheventricles oftheforebraintravels downtheaqueducttoreachthe
fourthventricle.Thefluidescapes throughholes intheroofofthefourthventricletoreachthe
subarachnoidspace.
Sections throughthepontineexpansionlookverydifferentfromthoseattheleveloftheinfe-
rior olivebecausetheyaredominatedbythehugepontinenucleiandcrossingpontinefibers.
However,somefeatures arecontinuations ofstructures observedinthecaudalhindbrain.
Examinethefollowingimagetoidentifythesefeatures:
-thefibers thatformthepyramidarehereswallowedupbythepontinenucleiand
crossingfibers,buttheystillformadistinctbundle.However,itis notcalledthepyra-
midhere;instead,thesefibers arereferredtoas thelongitudinalfibers ofthepons,
whicharemadeupofcorticospinalandcorticopontinefibers.
-thefibers ofthemediallemniscus arestillpresent,buttheynolongerlievertically;
theyareforcedtoassumeahorizontalposition,sittingabovethepontineexpansion.
-thefourthventricleseparates thelongitudinalpartofthehindbrainfromthecerebel-
lum.Thecerebellumforms theroof oftherostralhalfofthefourthventricle
-theinferiorcerebellarpeduncleis stillpresent,butithas moveddorsallytoenterthe
cerebellum,lyinglateraltothefourthventricle.
Adominantfeatureofthis sectionis themiddlecerebellarpeduncle,butithas beencutjust
beforeitenters thecerebellum.Ontheleft-handsideofthis image,youcanseethefibers of
thetrigeminalnerveas theytravelthroughthemiddlecerebellarpeduncletoreachthesur-
face.
Thenextimageshows asectionthroughtherostralendofthepontineexpansion.Itshows
somefeatures thatwereseeninthelowersectionbuthas someotherdistinctivefeatures.
28

Asection through therostralhindbrain showingthedecussation ofthesuperior cerebellar
peduncles.
-thecorticospinalandcorticopontinefibers (longitudinalfibers ofthepons)forma
prominentbundleinthecenter ofthebasilar pontineformation
-themediallemniscus stilllies dorsaltothebasilarpons,butithas movedawayfrom
themidline
-themiddlecerebellarpeduncleis notseenherebecauseithas leftthebrainstemto
enterthecerebellum
-thefourthventriclehas shrunkdowntoasmalltubethatis abouttobecometheaque-
ductofthemidbrain.
Anentirelynew featureof this sectionis theappearanceofthesuperiorcerebellarpeduncle,
whichis averyprominentfibergroupjustdorsaltothemediallemniscus -.This peduncle
consists offibers thathaveleftthecerebellumandareheadingtowardtheirterminationinthe
thalamus.Atthis level,thesuperiorcerebellar peduncleis crossingthemidline–thecrossing
is therefor calledthedecussationof thesuperior cerebellarpeduncle.This crossingis anim-
portantlandmarkbecauseitoccurs inthemostrostralsegmentofthehindbrain(theisthmus).
29

SECTIONSTHROUGHTHEMIDBRAIN
Thenextimageis asectionthroughthecaudalmidbrain.Itis particularlyinterestingbecause
this partof themidbrainoverlaps theisthmus andtherostralpartofthebasilarpontineforma-
tion.Thedorsalpartofthesectionis atthecaudalpartoftheinferiorcolliculus ofthemId-
brain,butthemiddleofthesectionshows features of themostrostralsegmentofthehind-
brain–thedecussationofthesuperiorcerebellar peduncleandthenucleus ofthetrochlear
nerve.
Asection through thecaudalmidbrain,showingtheoverlapwith rostralhindbrain struc-
tures –thedecussation ofthesuperior cerebellar peduncles andtherostralpontinenuclei.
Themostventralpartofthesectioncuts throughthemostrostralpartofthebasilarpontine
formation.Lateraltothecrossingpontinefibers is averylargefiberbundleformedbythecor-
ticospinalandcorticopontinefibers.This bundleis calledthecerebralpeduncle(crus cerebri).
Thenextsectionis exclusivelyamidbrainsectionatthelevelofthesuperiorcolliculus.Inthe
centeris theaqueduct,whichis surroundedbythepaleperiaqueductalgraymatter.Abovethe
periaqueductalgrayarethetwosuperior colliculi,whichhaveacharacteristicallylaminated
appearance.
Asection through thesuperior colliculus of themidbrain.
Below theperiaqueductalgrayaretwodarkroundmasses.Theycontainthefibers ofthesu-
periorcerebellarpeduncle,whichis ascendingtowardthethalamus.However,this regionco-
30

incides withthelocationoflargecells of therednucleus,acellgroupthatgives risetothede-
scendingrubrospinaltract.Theappearanceofthecells is obscuredbythefibers ofthesupe-
rior cerebellarpeduncle.
Lateraltotherednucleus,atthelateraledgeofthemidbrain,is theverylargecerebralpedun-
cle,whichcontains corticospinalandcorticopontinefibers thatareheadingtowards thehind-
brain.Ontheinnermarginof thedarkcerebralpeduncleis anextensivepaleareacalledthe
substantianigra.Thereasonfortheapparentlycontradictorynameis thatinfreshbrainspeci-
mens,theareais stainedblackbyirondeposits.Someofthecells ofthesubstantianigracon-
taindopamine,andwhichprojecttomotor centers in theforebrain.
Betweentherednucleus (superior cerebellarpeduncle)andthecerebralpeduncleis theelon-
gatedmediallemniscus,whichhas beenpushedlaterally.
Animportantfeatureofthis sectionis thepresenceofstreaks offibers thatstartfromunder
theperiaqueductalgrayandwhichcoursethroughtherednucleus.Thesearefibers oftheocu-
lomotornerve,whichareheadingtotheirpointof emergencebetweenthetwocerebralpe-
duncles (this spaceis calledtheinterpeduncular fossa).
Questions forrepetition
- Whatis thedifferencebetweenthespinalcordandthecaudalendofthehindbrain?
- Inwhichsensorypathways arethesuperiorandinferiorcolliculiinvolved?
- Whatarethenames ofthethreelargenucleithatprojectfromthehindbrainintothecere-
bellum?
- Whatis thenameofthepartof thehindbrainthatis mostrostrallylocated?
31

The brain stem cranial nerves
Cranialnerves 1and2(theolfactoryandopticnerves)areconnectedwiththeforebrain.The
remainingtencranialnerves (cranialnerves 3to12) arisefromthebrainstem.
Theventralsurfaceofthehuman brain showingtheorigins ofthecranialnerves.
Theoculomotornerve(3n)emerges outof theinterpeduncularfossafromtheventralsurface
ofthemidbrain.Thetrochlearnerve(4n) winds aroundthecerebralpeduncleafterexitingthe
dorsalsurfaceoftheisthmus (themostrostralsegmentofthehindbrain).Thetrigeminalnerve
emerges fromthebasilarpons.Thetrigeminalnerve(5n)is madeupoftwoparts,alargesen-
soryroot,andasmallermotorroot.Theabducens nerve(6n)emerges fromthecaudalborder
ofthepons.Thefacialnerve(7n)andthevestibulocochlearnerve(8n)leavethehindbrain
fromthelateralpartofthetrapezoidbody.Therootlets oftheglossopharyngealnerve(9n),
vagus nerve(10n),andaccessorynerve(11n) formalineatthelateralmarginofthecaudal
hindbrain.Therootlets ofthehypoglossalnerveemergefromthelateralborderofthepyra-
mid.
Cranialnerve3–theoculomotornerve
Thepairedoculomotornucleiarefoundatthelevelof thesuperiorcolliculus,closetothe
midline,andventraltotheperiaqueductalgreymatter.
Thefibers of theoculomotornervecoursethroughtherednucleus ontheirwaytotheinterpe-
duncular fossa.Themainoculomotornucleus contains somaticmotorneurons thatsupplyall
theeyemuscles exceptthesuperior obliqueandthelateralrectus muscles.Thesmaller
Edinger–Westphalnucleus contains preganglionicparasympatheticneurons thatsupplythe
constrictor ofthepupiland theciliarymuscle.Damagetotheoculomotornerveresults inadi-
vergentsquint(theeyeontheparalyzedsideis pulled laterallyanddownwards awayfromthe
lineof vision),droopingoftheeyelid(ptosis –duetopartialparalysis oftheeyelidraising
muscle),anddilatationofthepupil.
32

Paralysis oftherightoculomotor nerve–divergentsquint,dilatedpupil,anddroopingeye-
lid.
Cranialnerve4–thetrochlearnerve
Thetrochlearnucleus is locatedimmediatelycaudaltotheoculomotorcomplexdorsolateral
tothemediallongitudinalfasciculus.Whilethetrochlearnucleus was traditionallythoughtto
belocatedinthemidbrain,itis now clearthatitbelongs tothemostrostralsegmentofthe
hindbrain,calledtheisthmus.Thesmalltrochlear nerveexits thedorsalsurfaceofthebrain-
stem.Itcrosses themidlineinthesuperior medullaryvelumbeforewindingaroundthecere-
bralpeduncletosupplythesuperior obliquemuscleoftheeye.
Cranialnerve5–thetrigeminalnerve
Thetrigeminalnervesupplies theskinof thefaceand themuscles ofmastication(thechewing
muscles).Thesensoryfibers ofthetrigeminalnerveconnecttoaseries oflargenucleiextend-
ingfromtherostralhindbraintothespinalcord.Theprincipalsensorytrigeminalnucleus is
foundatthelevelwherethetrigeminalnerveconnects withthehindbrain.Thetrigeminalmo-
tornucleus lies medialtotheprincipalsensorynucleus.Thetworemainingnucleiofthe
trigeminalcomplexarethespinal(descending) andmesencephalicnuclei.Thespinalnucleus
is foundinthedorsolateralhindbrainatalllevels below theprincipalnucleus andis continu-
ous caudallywiththesubstantiagelatinosaofthespinalcord.Themesencephalicnucleus of
thetrigeminalsystemis smallanddifficulttoseeinlow powersections.Itconsists ofasingle
layer of largeroundcells ontheedgeof theperiaqueductalgraymatterofthemidbrain.
Cranialnerve6–theabducens nerve
Theabducens nervesupplies thelateralrectus muscleoftheeye.Theabducens nucleus lies
nexttothemidlineclosetothemediallongitudinalfasciculus.Thefibers oftheemergingab-
ducens nervecanbeseenrunningdorsoventrallythroughthetegmentumofthehindbrain.
Cranialnerve7–thefacialnerve
Thefacialnervesupplies themuscles oftheface.Italsosupplies tastesensoryfibers tothe
frontof thetongueandparasympatheticfibers tothesubmandibularsalivaryglandandother
smallglands inthehead.Themotorfibers leavingthemainfacialnucleus takeanunusual
coursethroughthehindbrain.Theytraveldorsomediallytocurlaroundtheabducens nucleus
beforeheadingventrolaterallytoexitthebrainstemventraltothetrigeminalsensorynucleus.
Tastefibers inthefacialnerveconnectwiththenucleus ofthesolitarytract.
Cranialnerve8–thevestibulocochlearnerve
Thevestibulocochlearnervereceives sensoryfibers fromtheorgans ofbalance(mainlythe
semicircularcanals)andhearing(thecochlea).Inatransversesectionofthejunctionofthe
pons andmedulla,thevestibulocochlearnerveenters thebrainstemas twoseparatebundles,
whichstraddletheinferiorcerebellarpeduncle.Thoseenteringventraltothepedunclearethe
vestibularfibers,whilethoseseendorsalandlateralto thepedunclearethecochlearfibers.
Thedorsalandventralcochlearnucleiarepaleareas embeddedwithinthefibers ofthe
cochlearnerveas is arches aroundthepeduncle.Thedorsalcochlearnucleus is themore
prominentofthetwo;itis easilyrecognizableinsections as itsurmounts theinferiorcerebel-
larpeduncle.Fournucleicomprisethevestibular nuclearcomplex.Theyarenamedsuperior,
lateral,medial,andspinal(descending)vestibular nuclei.Thesefournucleiarearranged
withinadiamond-shapedareainthefloor ofthefourthventricle.
33

Cranialnerve9–theglossopharyngealnerve
Theglossopharyngealnervereceives tastefibers fromtheposteriorthirdofthetongue,which
terminates inthenucleus of thesolitarytract.Theglossopharyngealnervecontains parasym-
patheticfibers thatsupplytheparotidsalivarygland,andwhichariseintheinferiorsalivatory
nucleus.Italsosupplies asinglepharyngealmuscle,thepalatoglossus,withfibers thatarisein
thenucleus ambiguous.
Cranialnerve10–thevagus nerve
Thevagus nervesupplies parasympatheticfibers tothethoracicandabdominalviscera.The
parasympatheticnucleus ofthevagus (thedorsalmotornucleus ofthevagus)lies justmedial
tothesulcus limitans insections oftheopenmedulla.Thenucleus ofthesolitarytractlies just
lateraltothedorsalmotornucleus ofthevagus.Itreceives tastefibers fromthefacial,glos-
sopharyngealandvagus nerves,andgeneralvisceralafferentfibers fromthevagus nerve.The
nucleus ambiguous contains largemultipolar motorneurons,whichsupplythepharynx,
palate,andlarynxmuscles viathevagus,cranialaccessory,andglossopharyngealnerves.
Cranialnerve11–theaccessorynerve
Thecranialpartoftheaccessorynervearises fromthenucleus ambiguous andis considered
bymanytobejustapartofthevagus nerve.Itcontributes tothevagalsupplyofthepharynx.
Thespinalrootoftheaccessorynerveis amotornervesupplyingsternomastoidandtrapezius
muscles intheneck.Itarises frommotoneurons incervicalspinalcordlevels C2toC4.It
travels intothecranialcavitytojoinbrieflywiththevagus nervebeforedescendingintothe
posterior triangleoftheneck.
Cranialnerve12–thehypoglossalnerve
Thehypoglossalnervesupplies themuscles ofthetongue.Thehypoglossalnucleus lies im-
mediatelydorsaltothemediallongitudinalfasciculus andis medialtothedorsalmotornu-
cleus of thevagus inthefloorof thefourthventricle.Thehypoglossalnervefibers travelven-
trallytoemergebetweentheinferioroliveandpyramid.
Functionalclassificationofmotor andsensorynervefibers
Thefibers thattravelinthecranialnerves canbeclassifiedonthebasis oftheirfunctions.
Efferent(motor)fibers areclassifiedas either somaticefferent,visceralefferent,orbranchial
efferent.
Afferent(sensory)fibers areclassifiedas somaticsensory,visceralsensory,orspecialsensory.
Thefollowingtablesummarises thefunctionalcomponents ofeachofthecranialnerves
34

Questions forrepetition
- Whichcranialnerves areconnectedtothebrainstem?
- Nametheconsequences of paralysis ofthethirdcranialnerve.
- Whatis thefifthcranialnervealsocalled?
- Whatis thefunctionofthesixthcranialnerve?
- Whatdotheparasympatheticfibers oftheglossopharyngealnerveinnervate?
- How manyfunctionalcomponents does theeleventhcranialnervehave?
35

The cerebellum
Thecerebellumis anoutgrowthof therostralhindbrain,arisingfromtheregionjustcaudalto
themidbrain(theisthmus andthefirstrhombomere).Thedevelopingcerebellumis relatively
smallatbirth,butitgrows rapidlyinthepostnatalperiod.
Thecentralwhitematterofthecerebellumis arrangedlikethetrunkofatree,withaseries of
majorbranches coveredwithgreymatter.Inamid–sagittalsection,thecerebellumlooks like
asliceof cauliflower,withbranches ofwhitematter formingthemajorlobules ofthecentral
partofthecerebellum.Thepartof thecerebelluminthemidlineis calledthevermis.Thever-
mis consists oftenrecognizablelobules inallmammals.
Thecerebralcortexrelies onthecerebellumforthecoordinationofmovement.Thecerebral
cortexrequests informationfromthecerebellumviathehugecorticopontinepathwaythat
travels totherostralhindbrainandwhichsynapses inthepontinenuclei.Thepontinenuclei
sendtheiraxons totheoppositesideof thecerebellumviathemiddlecerebellarpeduncle.
Thecerebellumresponds torequests fromtheforebrainviathesuperiorcerebellarpeduncle,
whichtravels totheventrolateralthalamicnucleus of theoppositeside.Theinferiorcerebellar
pedunclecarries fibers thatariseinthespinalcordandbrainstemontheirwaytothecerebel-
larcortex.
Thedorsalspinocerebellar tractandthepathways connectingthecerebellum,thalamus,
motor cortex,andpons.
36

Lobules of the cerebellar vermis and the cerebellar hemisphere
Thevermis ofthecerebelluminallmammals is dividedintotenlobules byaseries ofdeep
fissures.Thelargestofthesefissures is theprimaryfissure,whichdivides theanteriorvermis
(lobules 1-5)fromtheposterior vermis (lobules 6-10).Eachofthelobules has atraditional
Latinname,buttheonlyoneworthrememberingis thenodule,whichis thenameforlobule
10.Thehumancerebellarhemisphereis extraordinarilyelaborate,markedbyhundreds ofin-
dividualfoliathatrunfrommedialtolateral.
Asagittalsection ofratcerebellumshowingtheten lobules ofthevermis.Thedeepprimary
fissureseparates lobules 1-5(on theleft) fromlobules 6-10(on theright).
Thecenterofthecerebellumis filledwithfibers –calledthedeepcerebellarwhitematter.
Embeddedinthewhitematterarethreedeepcerebellarnucleioneachside.Thelargestof
thesenucleiis thedentatenucleus,whichis laterallyplaced.
Cerebellar peduncles
Thecerebellumis connectedtothehindbrainbythreecerebellarpeduncles oneachside:the
inferiorpedunclemainlycontains fibers enteringthecerebellumfromthespinalcordandthe
inferiorolive;thehugemiddlepedunclecontains fiberprojectingfromthebasilarpons tothe
cerebellum;thesuperiorpedunclecontains fibers thatleavethecerebellumtotravelthrough
therednucleus toreachthethalamus.
37

Adiagramofthehuman cerebellumshowingthevermis andthehemispheres (a)andthe
deepcerebellar nuclei(c).
The cerebellum has an ipsilateral connection with the body
Eachsideofthecerebralcortexis connectedtosensoryandmotoractivities ontheopposite
sideofthebody,buteachsideofthecerebellumis connectedtothesamesideofthebody.
Whenonecerebellarhemisphereis damaged,theclassicsymptoms ofcerebellardamage,
whichareincoordinationof voluntarymovementand tremor,occuronthesamesideas the
damage.
(a)Asagittalsection
The role of the cerebellum in motor control
Thecerebellumis responsibleforthecoordinationof complexmovements.Itdoes this by
comparingthemotorcommands withtheactualbodymovements thatresult.Onthebasis of
this comparison,itcanadjustmotorcontroltoimproveaccuracy.This monitoringandfeed-
backoccur in real-timeandis mostimportantatthecrucialendstages ofapurposefulmove-
ment.Thecerebellumplays avitalroleinthemanagementofpostureandbalance;itreceives
inputfromthevestibularsystemsothatitcanmonitorthepositionofthebodyinspace,andit
canmakemajorposturaladjustments if thepersonis indangeroflosingtheirbalance.
Inprimates,thecerebellumis vitalforcoordinatingthemovements ofthehands andeyes.For
monkeys,lifeinthetrees depends entirelyontheabilitytoplanandexecuteacrobaticleaps
involvingthecerebellum,vestibularsystem,eyes,andhands.Humans havethemostsophisti-
catedversion ofbinocularvisionamongtheprimates andhavelongfingers andopposable
thumbs.Thehumancerebellumhas evolvedtocapitalizeonthesecapacities throughthepre-
cisecoordinationofskilledfingermovements.Thefinecoordinationoffingermovementun-
der thecontrolofbinocularvisionhas givenhumans access totoolmanufacture.
The histological structure of the cerebellar cortex
thecerebellarcortexis madeupofthreelayers,theoutermolecularlayer,thePurkinjecell
layer,andtheinnergranulecelllayer.Deeptothegranulecelllayeris thedeepcerebellar
whitematter.
Thestructureofthecerebellarcortexis extraordinarilyuniform;thesamethreelayers are
seeninallparts ofthecerebellum,andtheirrelativethickness does notvary.Deeptothecor-
texis thedeepcerebellarwhitematter.
ThelargePurkinjecells aretheoutputcells ofthecerebellarcortex.Theiraxons projecttothe
cerebellarnuclei.
38

Cerebellar cortex.TheNisslstainedsection aboveshows themolecular layer (MoCb),the
Purkinjecelllayer (Pk),thegranulecelllayer (GrCb),andthedeepcerebellar whitematter
(cbw).Thediagrambelow shows thedendritictreeofaPurkinjecellin themolecular layer
andthetermination ofthePurkinjecellaxon in adeepcerebellar nucleus.
Mossy fibers and climbing fibers
Mostofthefibers projectingtothecerebellarcortexaremossyfibers thatsynapsewithgran-
ulecells.Theexceptionis theinputfromtheinferior olive,whichgoes directlytotheden-
dritictrees ofthePurkinjecells intheformof climbingfibers.Themossyfibers arisefrom
cells inthepontinenucleiandotherlargeprecerebellarnucleiinthehindbrainandfromthe
spinalcord.Thegranulecells sendtheiraxons tothedendrites ofPurkinjecells.Thegranule
cells aretinybutverytightlypacked-aboutonemillionpercubicmillimeter;thegranule
cells compriseabout70%ofalltheneurons inthebrain.As notedabove,theaxons fromthe
inferiorolivarynucleus formclimbingfibers,whichmakedirectcontactwiththedendritic
trees ofthePurkinjecells.Thereis evidencethattheinferiorolivarycells controlthetime
codeof thecerebellum,thus ensuringthateverylearnedmovementis playedbackinexactly
therighttimingsequence—theinferior olivecells fireatabout10Hz(tenactionpotentials per
second).
Microelectroderecordings intheratsuggestthateveryfoliuminthecerebellumcodes adif-
ferentmovementsequence.Forexample,someareconcernedwithtakingfoodwiththefin-
gers andtransferringittothemouth,andothers areinvolvedinrunningbehavior.Giventhe
tens ofthousands offoliainthehumancerebellum,itis possiblethatthecerebellumkeeps
learningnew movementsequences intoadultlife.Perhaps thereis evenabackhandfoliumin
keentennis players!
Thelargestconnectionofthehumancerebellumis theconnectionwiththemotorcortex.The
hugecorticopontinepathwayarises fromthecerebralcortex,synapses inthepons,andenters
thecerebellumthroughthemiddlecerebellarpeduncle.This seems tobeawayforthemotor
cortextoaskforhelpfromthecerebellumwhencoordinationofacomplexmovementis re-
quired.Theanswercomes backtothemotorcortexviathesuperiorcerebellarpeduncle.The
fibers ofthesuperiorcerebellar pedunclesynapseintheventrolateralnucleus ofthethalamus,
andthethalamocorticalfibers traveltothemotorcortex.
Therelationshipbetweencellnumbers inthecerebralcortexandthecerebellumis verycon-
sistentacross themammaliangroups.Althoughthesizeofthecerebralcortexvaries agreat
dealfromonemammalianfamilytoanother,theproportionalrelationshipbetweenthenum-
ber ofcerebralcorticalcells andthenumberof cerebellarcells is thesame–about1:4.
Themainwaythecerebellumtracks movementinthelimbs is fromsensations fromtheskin.
Itusedtobethoughtthatthemostimportantinformationonmovementwouldcomefrom
39

jointreceptors andmusclestretchreceptors,butitnow appears thatmostoftheinputcomes
fromreceptors thatdetectsensations of stretching,contact,orfoldingintheskin.Thesesensa-
tions provideveryfinedetailonthemovementofthelimbs andotherbodyparts.
Questions for repetition
- Of how manylayers is thecortexof thecerebellumconstituted?
- Is thecerebellumalsoconnected"side-wiseinverted" withthemuscles oftheotherhalfof
thebody?
- Towhichcells dothegranulecells sendtheir axonpotentials?
- How canthecerebellumcoordinatethecorrecttiming ofmovementsignals?
- Whatareclassicsymptoms ofdamagetothecerebellum?
40

DIENCEPHALON
The diencephalon
Thediencephalonsits betweenthemidbrainandthehypothalamus.Thecentralpartofthedi-
encephalonis thethalamus.Theother parts ofthediencephalonaretheprethalamus infront
ofthethalamus andthepretectalareabehind.Eachofthethreeparts ofthediencephalonis a
completesegmentoftheneuraltube,withalar andbasalcomponents,calledthediencephalic
prosomeres:thepretectalareais includedindiencephalicprosomere1;thethalamicareais in-
cludedindiencephalicprosomere2;theprethalamus is includedindiencephalicprosomere3.
Theword‘diencephalon’means ‘interbrain’–referringtothefactthatthis regionlinks the
mainparts oftheforebrain withthebrainstem.
Adiagramshowingthesegmentalcomponents ofthedevelopingbrain.Thediencephalic
segments p1,p2,andp3areshown.Notethehabenular stalkatthecaudalendofthedorsal
surfaceofthethalamus.
Thalamus
Inamid-sagittalsectionofthebrain,thethalamus sits dorsaltothehypothalamus.This ledto
along-heldmisunderstandingthatthehypothalamus is actuallyventraltothethalamus in
topologicalterms.However,therelationshipbetweenthetwois notas itseems.Becauseof
thesharp(almost180degrees) bendingof theneuraxis atthemidbrainduringdevelopment
(thecephalicflexure),thehypothalamus is actuallyrostraltothediencephalonindevelop-
mentalterms.
Thethalamus receives inputfromallthesensorysystems excepttheolfactorysystem.Eachof
thevisual,auditory,andtouch(somatosensory)sensorypathways terminates inits ownspe-
cialpartofthethalamus:thevisualpathwayends inthedorsallateralgeniculatenucleus;the
auditorypathwayends inthemedialgeniculatenucleus;thetouchpathwayends intheventro-
posterior nucleus.Eachofthesesensorythalamicnucleithensends sensoryinformationtothe
corticalareareservedforthatmodality.Inaddition,informationonmovementcoordination
fromthecerebellumalsoreaches theventrolateralnucleus ofthethalamus,andtheinforma-
tionis sentontothepartofthecortexconcernedwith motorcontrol–theprimarymotorcor-
tex.
41

Itis notnecessarytomemorizethenames of allthethalamicnuclei;thekeyones arethenu-
cleithatconnecttothemainsensorypathways–ventroposterior(VP,somatosensory),dorsal
lateralgeniculate(DLG,vision),andmedialgeniculate(MG,hearing),towhichshouldbe
addedtheventrolateralnucleus (VL),whichreceives inputfromthecerebellumandglobus
pallidus andprojects tothemotor cortex.Theremainingthalamicnucleiprojecttoassociation
areas ofthecerebralcortex.
Thedorsomedialedgeofthethalamus carries thehabenularnuclei,towhichareattachedthe
stalkofthepinealgland.Thepinealglandsecretes melatonin,whichinfluences thesleepcy-
cle.
Prethalamus
Themostrostraldiencephalicprosomere(p3) contains thezonaincerta–animportantregion
formotor control.InParkinson’s disease,stimulating electrodes thatareinsertedintothezona
incertacanminimizetremors andmusclestiffness inpatients withParkinsonism.This is
calleddeepbrainstimulation(DBS),andthetreatmentis usuallyverysuccessful.Thereticu-
larnucleiofp3playanimportantroleduringsleepby controllingtheoutputofthethalamus
tothecortex.Aftersleepis established,theinhibitory (GABAergic)neurons ofp3takecon-
troloftheactivityofthemainthalamicnucleitosetuparhythmicwavepatternofelectrical
activityinthecortex.
Pretectal area
Themostcaudaldiencephalicprosomere(p1) contains thenucleiofthepretectalarea.These
nucleiplayaroleinvisualreflexes.Aprominentp1landmarkatthejunctionoftheprethala-
mus withthemidbrainis theposterior commissure,whichbelongs top1andnottothemid-
brain,as previouslysupposed.
Questions for repetition
- Of whatparts does thediencephalonconsistof?
- Describethespatialrelationshipofthethalamus andhypothalamus fromadevelopmental
perspective?
- Whichthalamicnucleus is integratedintothevisualpathway?
- Whichpartofthediencephalonis stimulatedwithdeepbrainstimulationtocombat
Parkinsonism?
- Inwhichfunctionis thepretectalareainvolved?
42

HYPOTHALAMUS
The hypothalamus
Thename'hypothalamus' is derivedfromanoutdatedview thatthehypothalamus was simply
aventraladditiontothethalamus.New datafromdevelopmentalgeneexpressionhas re-
vealedafarmorecriticalrolefor thehypothalamus.Itis now clearthatthehypothalamus is
formedfromthemostrostralpartoftheneuraltube,anditis responsibleforgeneratingthe
wholeof thetelencephalonfromits alar plate.Itis byfarthemostcrucialcenterinthedevel-
opinghumanbrain.
Oneofthereasons formisunderstandingtheproperanatomicalplaceofthehypothalamus is a
lackof appreciationoftheeffectof thecervicalflexureofthedevelopingneuraltube.This se-
verebendintheembryonicneuraxis pushes thehypothalamus toits adultpositionunderthe
thalamus.
Thehypothalamus comprises thefirsttwoneuralsegments –theterminalprosomereandthe
peduncular prosomere.Theterminalhypothalamicprosomeregives risetotheeyeandthete-
lencephalonfromits alarplate,givingrisetotheposteriorpituitaryglandfromits basalplate.
Thepeduncularhypothalamicprosomereis connected toprosomere3ofthediencephalon
Features ofthehypothalamus seeninamid-sagittalsection
Inamid-sagittalsectionofthebrain,theprominentanatomicallandmarks ofthehypothala-
mus canbeseen–theopticchiasmrostrally,themammillarybodies caudally,andthepitu-
itarystalkbetweenthetwo.
Themostrostralpartofthehypothalamus sits abovetheopticchiasm.Thehypothalamicnu-
cleus sittingimmediatelyabovethechiasmis appropriatelycalledthesuprachiasmaticnu-
cleus.This nucleus serves as a24-hourclockforthebrain;its neurons haveaninternaltiming
systemthatcanbeadjustedwithlightintensityinformationfromtheopticnerves.Ifanani-
malis keptincompletedarkness,theclockreverts toa25-hourcycle.Theclockis essential
forthetimingofpeaks ofhormonalsecretions fromendocrineglands.
Thecentralpartofthehypothalamus thatbears thepituitarystalkis calledthetubercinereum.
Thehypothalamus andsurvivalbehaviors
Duringvertebrateevolution,complexbehaviors andmovementsets becameorganizedinahi-
erarchyof modules inthebrain.Atthetopofthehierarchyarebehaviors relatingtothesur-
vivaloftheindividualandthespecies.Theseincludeeating,drinking,defensivebehaviors,
reproduction,andthebasicmovementpatterns neededtoexploretheimmediateenvironment.
Thesesurvivalbehaviors areprimarilycontrolledbythehypothalamus.Thehypothalamic
controlcenters forsurvivalbehaviors areclusteredintwomaingroups.Thefirstgroupin-
cludes systems fordefense,reproduction,andingestion(feedinganddrinking).Thenuclei
thatcontrolthesebehaviorsets,includingthelargeventromedialnucleus,arelocatedinthe
medialhalfofthehypothalamus.Eachspecificbehaviorset,suchas eating,is relatedtoone
particularsetofhypothalamicnuclei.Thesecondgroupofsurvivalbehaviororganizers is lo-
catedinthemammillarybodyinthecaudalpartofthehypothalamus andinnearbymidbrain
parts (thesubstantianigraandtheventraltegmentalarea).This secondgroupinitiates ex-
ploratoryandforagingbehaviors,suchas turningtheheadandeyes towardanobjectofinter-
estandwalkingorrunningtoexplorethesurroundings.
43

Asagittalsection oftheratbrain showingthemain parts ofthehypothalamus.
Thepituitarystalkis attachedclosetoVMH.
MB=mammillarybody;Pa=paraventricular nucleus;SCh=suprachiasmaticnucleus;
VMH=ventromedialhypothalamicnucleus.
44

Controlof theendocrinesystembythehypothalamus
Thehypothalamus has severalpowerfulneurongroups thatcontrolthehormonalsecretions of
thepituitarygland.Langdon-Brownfamouslydescribedthepituitaryglandas 'theleaderin
theendocrineorchestra' (Hubble,1961).This is aclevermetaphorthatreserves theroleofthe
conductor oftheorchestrafor thehypothalamus.Inanorchestra,theconductorgives direc-
tions tothefirstviolin,whois theorchestra's leader.
Hypothalamiccontrolovertheposterior pituitaryis direct.Largeneurosecretorycells inthe
paraventricularandsupraopticnucleisendtheir axons totheposteriorpituitary,releasingoxy-
tocinandvasopressinintothebloodstream.Oxytocinstimulates contractionoftheuterus at
birthandinitiates milksecretionafterbirth.Italsoplays animportantroleinadultpair-bond-
ingandmaternal-infantattachment.Vasopressin,alsocalledantidiuretichormone(ADH),in-
creases bloodpressureandcontrols urineproduction.
Hypothalamicsecretion of theposterior pituitaryhormones oxytocin andADH(vaso-
pressin).Thehormones areproducedbyneurosecretorycells in theparaventricular nu-
cleus andarereleasedfromaxon terminals thatreach theposterior pituitary.
45

Thecontrolovertheanterior pituitaryis notas direct:cells intheparaventricularnucleus re-
leasetinyamounts ofreleasinghormones intoaspecializedportalbloodsystemthatcarries
themtotheanteriorpituitary.Aportalbloodsystemhas twosets ofcapillaries connectedbya
portalvein.Inthecaseofthepituitary,thefirstcapillarybedcollects thereleasinghormones
fromthehypothalamus.Smallportalveins transportthereleasinghormones tothesecond
capillarybedintheanteriorpituitary,wheretheyreachendocrinesecretingcells.Thereleas-
inghormones stimulatethereleaseofthemajorhormones fromanteriorpituitarycells -
growthhormone(GH),thyroid-stimulatinghormone(TSH),adrenocorticotrophichormone
(ACTH),follicle-stimulatinghormone(FSH),prolactin(PRL),andluteinizinghormone(LH).
Thehypothalamus secretes releasinghormones which stimulatetheendocrinecells ofthe
anterior pituitarytoreleasetheir hormoneproducts.Thereleasinghormones aredelivered
tohypothalamiccapillaries thatdrain intoveins which formaspecialportalvenous system.
Theportalveins endin asecondcapillarysystemin theanterior pituitary.
Questions forrepetition
- Fromwhichprosomeres does thehypothalamus arise?
- Whichhypothalamicnucleus is responsiblefor determiningthecircadianrhythm?
- Whichhypothalamicstructures areinvolvedinbehaviors suchas foragingandexplo-
ration?
- Whathormones aresecretedintheposteriorpituitary gland?
- Whatkindofhormones aresecretedintheanteriorpituitarygland?
46

Telencephalon
The Telencephalon
TELENCEPHALON –THECEREBRALHEMISPHERES
Thetwotelencephalicoutgrowths arisefromthedevelopinghypothalamus.Thetelencephalic
outgrowthoneachsideforms thecerebralhemisphereorcerebrum.Thecerebralhemisphere
ofeachsideconsists ofanouterlayeror palliumandasubpalliallayer.Thepalliumincludes
thecortex.Thesubpalliumforms severaldeepcellgroups,thelargestofwhicharethestria-
tumandpallidum(sometimes calledthebasalganglia).
Thetwotelencephalicoutgrowths arisefromthealar plateoftherostralhypothalamicseg-
ment.This diagramshows onlyonetelencephalicoutgrowth.Thetelencephalon forms the
pallium(thefuturecortex)andthesubpallium(mainlythestriatumandpallidum).
Thepalliumcanbedividedintomedial,dorsal,lateral,andventral.Inmammals,mostofthe
cerebralcortexis derivedfromthedorsalpalliumand is calledtheneocortex.Theareas deriv-
ingfromtheventralpalliummainlybelongtotheolfactorysystem.Theolfactorycortexis
sometimes referredtoas allocortex.
Thesmallerlateralpallium,whichlies betweentheneocortexandtheolfactorycorticalareas,
forms asmallareaoftheneocortexcalledtheinsula,whichis mainlydevotedtotasteandvis-
ceralsensation.Themedialpallialsubdivisiongives risetothehippocampus.
Neocortex
Thehumanneocortexis massivelyexpanded.Foldingincreases its surfacearea,forming
raisedareas (gyri)andgrooves (sulci).
47

Acoronalsection through theforebrain ofamouseshowingthefour pallialareas –medial
pallium(MP),dorsalpallium(DP),lateralpallium(LP),andventralpallium(VP).The
corpus callosumseparates themedialpallium(hippocomapus)formthedorsalpallium
(neocortex).
Thepattern ofsulciandgyrivaries fromperson toperson,butsomegyrican beconsis-
tentlyidentified.
48

Thecerebrumcanbedividedintolobes,whicharenamedfortheoverlyingcranialbones –
frontal,parietal,temporal, andoccipital.
Thelobes ofthecerebrumas viewedfromthelateralside.Thecentralsulcus separates the
frontalandparietallobes.Thelateralfissureseparates thetemporallobefromthefrontal
andparietallobes.
Theneocortexhas well-definedsensoryareas for thereceptionoftouch(S1),vision(V1),
hearing(A1),andtaste.Thevisualcortexis locatedin theoccipitalpoleofthecortex,andthe
auditorycortexis locatedin thetemporallobe.Thetouch(somatosensorycortex)is located
rostrallynearthefrontalpole.Theneocortexhas noolfactorysensoryareabecauseallolfac-
toryinformationprojects totheventralcorticalareas –theolfactorybulb,olfactorytubercle,
andpiriformcortex.Infrontof thesomatosensorycortexis theprimarymotorcortex–an
areadevotedtovoluntarymotor controloftheoppositesideofthebody.Electricalstimulation
ofthemotorcortexproduces movements ontheoppositesideofthebody.Themotorcortex
sends amajorpathwaytothebrainstem(corticobulbartract)andanothertothespinalcord
(corticospinaltract)toinitiatemovements.
Theprimarysensoryandmotor areas in thecortex. Theprimarysomatosensoryarea(S1)
is separatedfromtheprimarymotor area(M1)bythecentralsulcus.Theprimaryauditory
areais separatedfromS1bythedeeplateralfissure(notlabeledhere).Theprimaryvisual
areais almostentirelylocatedon themedialsideoftheoccipitallobe.Thetasteareacannot
beseen in this diagrambecauseitis hidden in thelateralfissure.
49

Atahistologicallevel,theneocortexis madeupofsix well-definedlayers,numberedoneto
six.Theprimarysensoryareas arecharacterizedbydenselayers ofgranulecells -layers 2and
4.Theprimarymotorcortexis characterizedbyaprominentpyramidalcelllayer(layer5)and
avirtualabsenceofthemaingranulecelllayer(layer 4)andsois oftenreferredtoas the
agranular cortex.Manypyramidalcells inlayer5areverylarge,sendingaxons overgreatdis-
tances toreachmotorneurons inthespinalcord.
Acoronalsection ofthemouseforebrain showingthehistologicaldifferencebetween the
primarymotor cortex(M1) andprimarysomatosensorycortex(S2).Thegranular layer 4is
missingfromM1butveryprominentin S1.
TheHippocampus
Thehippocampus is thepartof thecerebralcortexthatis involvedinmemorysystems.The
hippocampus arises fromthemedialpallium.Itconsists ofthedentategyrus,thethreeCAre-
gions,thesubiculum,andtheentorhinalcortex.Thehippocampus is responsibleforshort-
termmemoryregistration.
Theentorhinalcortexis locatedintheparahippocampalgyrus is likeaGPS thatcontains a
precisetwo-dimensionalgridmapofsurroundings;ithelps tolinkthememoryofevents to
theplaceinwhichtheyoccurred.Theentorhinalcortexsends placeinformationtothehip-
pocampus inachainofconnections fromthedentategyrus,theCA3region,andfinallytothe
CA1region.TheCA1regionsends its informationtothesubiculum,whichis theoutputcen-
terforthehippocampus.Thesubiculumprojects totheseptumandhypothalamus viaalarge
fiberbundlecalledthefornix.
Subpallialstructures
Underthecoveringofthepalliumareanumber oflargespecializedneurongroups.The
largestof thesegroups arethestriatumandpallidum,whichplayessentialroles inthecontrol
ofmovements.Thesmaller subpallialgroups (theamygdala,septum,andpreopticarea)are
concernedwithemotionalexpressionandbehavior patterns.
50

Striatumandpallidum–the'basalganglia'
Thelargestofthesubpallialgroups arethestriatumandglobus pallidus.Traditionalterminol-
ogyrefers tothis pairas the'basalganglia.' Unfortunately,differentbooks usethetermbasal
gangliainavarietyofdifferentways,someaddingtheamygdalaandotherdeepforebrain
structures,andsomeevenaddingparts ofthediencephalonandmidbrainsuchas thezonain-
certaandsubstantianigra. Becauseof this,itis besteithertoavoidtheuseofthetermbasal
gangliaaltogetherortomakeitclear whenyouarereferringtothestriatumandglobus pal-
lidus alone.
Middleslicetoshowstriatum,pallidumandthalamus.
Thestriatumcontains twoparts,thecaudatenucleus andtheputamen.Onthemedialsideof
theputamenis thepallidum,representedchieflybytheglobus pallidus.Togetherthestriatum
andpallidumformapowerfulmotor controlsystem,enablingthebraintochoosefroma'li-
brary' of inheritedstereotypedbehaviors accordingtotheneedatanymoment.Thestriatum
receives asignificantinputfromthemotor cortex,and itinturnprojects totheglobus pal-
lidus.Theglobus pallidus totheventrolateralnucleus ofthethalamus andthecircuitis com-
pletedbytheprojectionofthis nucleus tothemotorcortex.Anotherimportantinputconnec-
tionof thestriatumis thedopaminergicpathwaythatarises fromthesubstantianigra.Damage
tothis dopaminergicprojectionis theunderlyingcauseofParkinson's disease.
Aless well-knownpartofthestriatumis theaccumbens nucleus,whichlies ventraltotheros-
tralparts ofthecaudateand putamen.Theaccumbens nucleus alsoreceives adopaminergic
projectionfromthebrainstem,butinthis case,itcomes fromtheventraltegmentalarea,
whichis medialtothesubstantianigra.Thedopaminergicprojectiontotheaccumbens forms
thebasis ofaninternalrewardsysteminthebrain.
51

Theamygdala
Theamygdalalies deeptothepiriform(primaryolfactory)cortexonthemedialsideofthe
temporallobe,justrostraltothehippocampus.Theamygdalais acomplexstructuremadeup
ofmanydifferentsubnuclei.Thesubnucleioftheamygdalacanbedividedintotwomain
groups –amedicalgroupthatis interconnectedwiththeolfactorysystemandalateralgroup
thatis connectedtocircuits involvedinemotionalresponses,particularlyfear.Thelateral
groupintheamygdalaresponds tosensations thatsignaldanger.Itcanreactbyactivatingau-
tonomicandendocrinecenters,suchas the'fightorflight' mechanisms.Mostofthesecircuits
arecloselyinterconnectedwiththehypothalamus.Fearandstress cangenerateverypowerful,
unconscious emotionalmemories throughtheamygdala.Theseunconscious fears arevery
difficulttosuppress orerase.
Another majorroleoftheamygdalais its controlof hierarchicalbehavior(peckingorder)in
vertebrates.Socialhierarchies arefundamentalinanimals thatbelongtolargegroups where
dominancebehaviors maintaintheeffectivestructureofthegroup.
Thereis acomplexrelationshipbetweentheamygdalaandaggressivebehavior,andthena-
tureof aggressivebehavioris oftenmisinterpreted.KonradLorenzarguedthatthestrongest
forms of aggressivebehavior arethosethatoccurbetweenmembers ofthesamespecies,usu-
allyrelatedto attempts toestablishaplaceinahierarchy(Lorenz,2002).
Adiscreditedterm–'TheLimbicSystem'
Inmanytextbooks,asectiondealingwiththeamygdalaandrelatedstructures is titled'The
LimbicSystem.'Westronglyrecommendyouavoidusingthis termbecauseitcanbedefined
inmanydifferentandconfusingways.Theterm'limbic' has its originin'legrandlobelim-
bique' ofBroca.Brocawantedtodraw attentiontothecurvedbeltoftelencephalicstructures
thatborder thecentralparts of theforebrain(thewordlimbicrefers toaborderland).This
originaldefinitionofthe'limbiclobe' includedtheventralhippocampus,theamygdala,the
cingulategyrus,andthefornix.However,inthecontemporaryliterature,thelimbiclobeis of-
tensaidtoincludeallthevarious parts ofthehippocampalformation,theseptum,theolfac-
torytubercle,andthebednucleus ofthestriaterminalis,theamygdala,andthecingulate
gyrus.Differentauthors addorsubtractstructures fromthedefinitioninwhatsometimes
seems tobearandommanner.Somegosofar as toincludethehypothalamus andparts ofthe
brainstem.Theirlogicis thatallstructures thatmightbeinvolvedinemotions orprimitivebe-
haviors shouldbelumpedtogether underthis title.Theresultis soconfusingthatwestrongly
recommendthatyouavoidusingtheterm'limbic' altogether.
Thesubcorticalwhitematter
Deeptothecerebralcortexis athicklayerof whitematter.Inconnectionalterms,theaxons in
thecerebralwhitematterareofthreetypes –associationfibers,commissuralfibers,andpro-
jectionfibers.Theassociationfibers runfromoneareaofthecortextoanotherareaofthecor-
texwithinthesamehemisphere.Theymaybeshort(joiningthecortexofadjacentgyri,for
example) ormayformlongassociationbundles runningfromonelobetoanother.Thecom-
missuralfibers joincorticalareas of onehemispheretoequivalentareas ontheoppositeside.
Theprojectionfibers traveldownwards fromthecortextothestriatum,pallidum,dien-
cephalon,midbrain,hindbrain,andspinalcord,orupwards fromthethalamus tothecortex.
Forebraincommissures
Therearefourcommissures intheforebrain,thelargestofwhichis thecorpus callosum,
whichconnects theneocorticalareas ofthetwosides.Thehippocampalcommissure(fornix
commissure)connects therightandlefthippocampalregions.Theanteriorcommissurecon-
nects areas ofthetemporallobes,includingsomeolfactoryareas.Thesmallposteriorcom-
missureis locatedinthepretectalareaof thediencephalon,adjacenttothemidbrain.
Thecorpus callosum lies underthecingulategyrus,abovetheseptum,andthelateralventri-
cle.Therostralendis calledthegenu,thecentralpartis calledthebody,andthethickened
caudalendis calledthesplenium.Theventraltipof thegenuforms therostrumofthecorpus
52

callosum.Inmostcases,fibers crossinginthecorpus callosumconnectsymmetricalparts of
thecortex.Thefibers crossinginthegenuof thecorpus callosumreachthetipofthefrontal
lobeinaU-shapedformationcalledtheforceps minor.Similarly,thefibers crossinginthe
spleniumreachthetipoftheoccipitallobeinalargerU-shapedformationcalledtheforceps
major.
Thehippocampalcommissure(alsocalledthefornixcommissure) is locatedventraltothe
corpus callosum.
Theanteriorcommissureis locatedattherostralendofthediencephaloninfrontofthean-
terior columns ofthefornix.Theanterior commissureis averyusefullandmarkinthestudy
ofsections oftheforebrain:itlies attherostralendofthediencephalonatthelevelwherethe
interventricularforamenconnects thelateralventricletothethirdventricle.Thepreopticarea
is ventraltotheanteriorcommissure,whichis themostventralpartofthesubpallium,and
caudaltothepreopticareais therostralendof thehypothalamus.Theanteriorcommissureis
alsoagoodmarkerfortherostralendofthehippocampus andtheamygdalainhumanbrain
slices.
Theposteriorcommissureis foundinthecaudalpretectalarea.Itlinks togetheranumberof
pretectalnucleiinvolvedin eyereflexes.Inthepast,theposteriorcommissurewas oftenmis-
takenlythoughttobelongtothemidbrain,butgeneexpressionproves itlies inthecaudaldi-
encephalon.
Questions forrepetition
- Of whatdoes thetelencephalonconsistof?
- Whatdoes thepalliumcomprise?
- Whatenables thehumanbraintoundergomassiveexpansion?
- Whatseparates theprimarymotorandtheprimarysensoryareas?
- Whatlayers makeuptheneocortex?
- Whichpartofthestriatumis involvedintherewardsystem?
- Inwhichfunctions is theamygdalainvolved?
- Whattypes ofwhitemattertracks canbedistinguished?
53

The Broadmann areas of the cortex
Anumberofanatomicallydistinctareas canberecognizedinthehumanneocortex.Many
modernstudies estimatethattheremaybeabout180anatomicallyandfunctionallydistinctar-
eas inthehumanneocortex.
Therehavebeenseveralattempts overthepast150years todefinethemajorhumancortical
areas.Themostinfluentialis Brodmann's.
In1910,Brodmannpublishedanumberedlistof about50differentareas basedonhistologi-
caldifferences.This numberingsystemis stillwidelyusedtoday.
ThemostrecognizedBrodmannareas arethefollowing:
- area4–primarymotorcortex(M1) -locatedintheprecentralgyrus
- areas 9and10–theprefrontalcortex–locatedrostraltotheprimarymotorcortex
- areas 3,1,and2–primarysomatosensorycortex (S1)-locatedinthepost-central
gyrus
- area41–primaryauditorycortex(A1)–locatedontheuppersurfaceofthesuperior
temporalgyrus,mainlyinsidethelateralfissure
- area17–primaryvisualcortex(V1) –locatedonthemedialsurfaceoftheoccipital
lobeintheupperandlowerbanks of thecalcarinesulcus
- areas 45and44-Broca's area(motorspeecharea)–locatedinthetriangularandoper-
cularparts oftheinferiorfrontalgyrus,immediatelyrostraltotheinferiorpartofthe
precentralgyrus inthedominanthemisphere
- areas 39and40–Wernicke's area(speechcomprehensionarea)–locatedontheupper
surfaceofthesuperiortemporalgyrus caudaltotheprimaryauditorycortexinthe
dominanthemisphere.MostofWernicke' areais insidethelateralfissure.
OverviewofimportantBroadmann areas.
54

Questions forrepetition
- How many,functionallydifferentneocorticalareas areassumednowadays?
- WhichBroadmannareas areincludedinBroca's area?
- Inwhichfunctions areBroadmannareas 39and40involved?
55

MOTOR SYSTEMS
Motor systems
Thenervous systemcanrespondtoexternalchallenges throughmusclecontraction,internal
adjustments toheartrateandbreathing,andsecretionofhormones inresponsetostress and
otherbodilyrequirements.
Controlof skeletalmuscles
Theskeletalmuscles areundervoluntarycontrolmostofthetime.However,insomecases,
thecontractionofthesemuscles is intheformofareflex,suchas whenweburnourfingers in
aflame.Reflexes arefaster thanthetypicalsystemof conscious control.
Inhumans,thecentralareafor thecontrolof theskeletalmuscles starts is theprimarymotor
areaof thecerebralcortex,whichis locatedintheprecentralgyrus ofthefrontallobe.Electri-
calstimulationofthemotorcortexproduces contractionofmuscles ontheoppositesideof
thebody.Thebodyparts arerepresentedupsidedownontheprecentralgyrus,withthehead
atthebottom,andthelower limbatthetop,withthemuscles ofthelegandfoot,represented
ontheextensionofthemotorcortexontothemedialsurfaceofthehemisphere.
Thesomatotopicpattern ofcontrolofmuscles in theprimarymotor cortex.Notethatthe
areas for controloftheleg andfootmuscles areon themedialsideofthecortex.
Themotorcortexis connectedtothemotorneurons ofthespinalcordbyalongpathway
calledthecorticospinaltract.Thecorticospinaltractarises fromlargepyramidalcells inthe
motor cortex.Theiraxons travelthroughtheinternalcapsule,cerebralpeduncle,thebasilar
pons,andthemedullarypyramidtoreachthecaudalendofthehindbrain.Atthis point,most
ofthecorticospinalfibers cross totheoppositesideinthepyramidaldecussation.Duetothat,
theymakeconnections withmotorneurons ontheoppositesideofthebodyfromtheircorti-
calorigin.
Becausethecorticospinalfiber bundles formthemedullarypyramids,thecorticospinaltract
has traditionallybeencalledthepyramidaltract.This termis insomeways unfortunatebe-
cause,bycoincidence,thecells oforiginof thecorticospinaltractarepyramid-shapedneu-
rons inthemotorcortex.Another reasontoavoidusingthetermpyramidaltractis theunfor-
56

tunateandnow discredited'pyramidal/extrapyramidal' concept,whichwas anearlybutmisin-
formedattempttoexplaintheorganizationofdifferentparts ofthemotorsystems.
Theconceptofan extrapyramidalsystembecamepopular amongneurologists inthe
early20thcentury,whoweretryingtodistinguishthemotor problems arisingfrom
damagetothepyramidal(corticospinal) tractfrom other motor syndromes.Theycon-
trastedthedirect(monosynaptic) projectionofthecortextomotoneurons (thepyrami-
dalsystem)withwhattheybelievedtobeanalternativemultisynapticpathwayfrom
cortextomotoneurons,whichtheycalledtheextrapyramidalsystem.Theyhypothe-
sizedthatthis multisynapticpathwaywentfrom cortextostriatum andpallidum,then
tovarious midbrainandhindbraincenters,andfinallytothespinalcord.Theproblem
is thatthehypothesizedchainofdescendingconnections does notexist.Itwas fa-
mouslydebunkedin1962byNautaandMehler.Theyshowedthattheglobus pallidus
projects almostentirelytothethalamus rather thantothemidbrainandthehindbrain
motor centers.Despitethis,the'extrapyramidal'conceptlives onintextbooks andin
lectures givenbyneurologists.
Thecourseofthecorticospinaltractfromthemotor cortextothespinalcord.
Damagetothecorticospinaltract
Humans whoexperienceddamagetothemotor cortex orthecorticospinaltractcannotper-
formtasks thatrequireprecisemovements of individualfingers,suchas writing,sewing,tying
knots,andpickingupsmallobjects.Less precisemovements,andthosethatinvolvelarger
musclegroups,areless severelyaffected.Whenacerebralstrokedamages thecorticospinal
57

tractinhumans,othernearbyareas,suchas thestriatum,arealsodamaged.Becauseofthis,
theloss offinemovementis accompaniedbyhypertonia(stiffness orspasticity)andhyper-
reflexiarelatedtostriataldamage.
Theroleofnon-corticalmotorcenters –modules formotorcontrol
Weplanmovements conceptually,thinkinginsequences andoutcomes ratherthanjointan-
gles andcontractionofindividualmuscles.Thebraintranslates high-levelactionplans into
modular systems tomanagethecontrolof dozens of muscles neededtocarryoutaparticular
tasktomakethis process moreefficient.Thesemodularcontrolsystems arefoundinthebrain
stemandspinalcord.Thesemodules arepre-wiredduringbraindevelopmenttoproduce
semi-automaticmovements likewalkingandchewing.This makes iteasierforthemotorcor-
textogetaresultwithouttheneedtoconnecttoindividualmotorneurons.Duringvertebrate
evolution,complexbehaviors andmovementsets becameorganizedinahierarchyofmod-
ules.Atthetopofthehierarchyaresurvivalbehaviors -eatinganddrinkingbehaviors,defen-
sivebehaviors,reproductivebehaviors,andmovementpatterns toexploretheimmediateenvi-
ronment.Themostimportantcenters for thecontrolofsurvivalbehaviors arelocatedinthe
hypothalamus.
Brainstemandspinalcordmodules for controlofcomplexmovements
Eachhypothalamicbehavioralorganizer connects withmovementmodules inthebrainstem
andspinalcord.Forexample,feedingmayinvolveturningtheheadtolookaround,running
toafoodsource,reachingandgrasping,andlickingandchewing.Eachoftheseactivities is
sequencedbyaparticularpartofthemidbrain,hindbrain,orspinalcord.Thehypothalamus
activates anumberofthesemovementmodules inacoordinatedprogramtoachievethede-
siredbehavior.Thebrainstemoffers modules for orientingmovements oftheheadandneck,
licking,chewing,facialexpression,vocalization,and controlofbreathing.Themovement
modules inthespinalcordincludethosethatcontrolposture,locomotion,reaching,and
grasping.
Anexampleofmodularcontrolatthespinalcordlevelis thewithdrawalofthelowerlimb
fromasharppaininthefoot,suchas standingonapieceofbrokenglass.Interneurongroups
ofthespinalcordentirelyhandlethis complexresponse,andthewithdrawalmovementoc-
curs beforethepainis evenregisteredinthecerebralcortex.Theprimaryresponseis topull
thefootawayfromthesourceof thepain,requiringcontractionofhipflexors (psoas andilia-
cus) andkneeflexors (hamstrings)whileinhibitingthecorrespondingextensors topermitthe
movement.Theproblemwiththis responseis thatitwillalsocauseafallunless adjustments
aremade.Themoduletakes careof this bycontractinghipextensors,hipabductors,andknee
extensors oftheoppositelegtostabilizethebody.Inthis way,tenormoremuscles ineachleg
areeither contractedormadetorelaxinorder toachievethewholepatternofmovement
neededtoterminateapainfulstimulus.
58

Reflexactions followinga painfulinjurytotherightfoot.On theright-handside,theflexor
muscles pullthefootawayfromthepainfulstimulus,andtheextensors areinhibited.On
theleftside,theextensor muscles areactivatedtomaintain stability.
Descendingmotorcontrolpathways other thanthecorticospinaltract
As wellas sendingfibers tothespinalcordinthecorticospinaltract,themotorcortexsends
axons tothebasilarpons (corticopontinefibers)andthebrainstem(corticobulbarfibers)in
ordertoconnectwiththecerebellumandbrainstemmotorcenters.Severalcenters inthe
brainstemgiverisetodescendingtracts thatendintheinterneuronpools oftheintermediate
spinalgraymatter.Thesearetherubrospinal,tectospinal,reticulospinal,andvestibulospinal
tracts,eachcontrollingdifferentaspects ofmovement.
Theroles ofthestriatumandpalliduminmotor control
Thestriatumandthepallidumarelargemasses of graymatterthatliedeeptothecerebralcor-
tex.Thestriatumconsists ofthreeparts –thecaudatenucleus,theputamen,andtheaccum-
bens nucleus.Medialtotheputameninthemainpartofthepallidum,calledtheglobus pal-
lidus.Theglobus pallidus is separatedfromthethalamus bytheinternalcapsule.
Theaccumbens nucleus lies deeptotherostralparts ofthecaudatenucleus andputamen.
Thestriatalandpallidalcenters havealongevolutionaryhistoryandcanbeclearlyidentified
inreptiles andbirds.Thestriatumandpallidumarepartofamajorforebraincircuitofcon-
nections,regulatingtheformandstyleof movements.
This circuitbegins withneurons inthemotor cortex,projectingtocells inthestriatum.Stri-
atalneurons projecttothepallidum.Thepallidumprojects tothemidbrainandthethalamus.
Thethalamicnucleus involvedthenprojects backtothecerebralcortex,alteringmovements
intheplanningstageorwhiletheyareinprogress.Thesubstantianigrais intimatelycon-
nectedwiththestriatumthroughthedopaminergicnigrostriatalpathway.
59

Arostralcoronalsliceshowingthecaudate(Cd),putamen (Pu),andaccumbens (Acb).
Acoronalslicethrough themiddleofthecerebrumshowingthecaudatenucleus (Cd),
putamen (Pu),andglobus pallidus (GP)andtheir relationshiptotheinternalcapsule(ic)
andthalamus (Th).
60

Theconnection circuitstartingfromexcitatoryglutamateneurons in theprimarymotor
cortex(GLU).ThecorticalGLU neurons projecttoGABAneurons in thestriatum.The
GABAstriatalneurons in turn projecttoGABAneurons in thepallidum.Thecircuitis
completedbytheprojection of thepallidalneurons tothethalamus andthethalamicGABA
projection backtothecortex.
This setofconnections underlies theproductionofpredeterminedmovementpatterns.Many
species areknowntohavecomplexpatterns of movementassociatedwithmatingandordis-
plays ofaggression.Itseems possiblethatthestriatal/pallidalcomplexis themaincenterfor
theinitiationofthesegeneticallydeterminedmovementpatterns.
Aninterestingfeatureofthecells of thestriatumandpallidumis thattheyinfluencethecortex
byinhibitingthalamicneurons usingtheinhibitoryneurotransmitterGABA.This makes them
verydifferentfromthecorticalneurons thatconnecttothestriatum;thesecorticalneurons re-
leasetheexcitatorytransmitter substanceglutamate.
Wedonothaveaclearideaofthepreciseroleof thestriatumandpalliduminhumans,butwe
dohaveclues fromcases inwhichtheseareas aredamaged.Thefindings aredisorders ofthe
restingtoneofmuscles,difficultystartingmovements,andunwantedinvoluntarymovements.
InParkinson's disease,theinputtothestriatumfromthesubstantianigrais damaged.There-
sultis amassiveanddisablingincreaseinmuscletone,accompaniedbytremorinthehands,
andgreatdifficultyinstartingmovements.Asevereformofdamagetothestriatumis seenin
late-stageHuntington's disease,wheretheface,trunk,andlimbs writhecontinuously.Inthe
caseofcerebralpalsy,thestriatumandpallidumarelikelydamagedinthebabybeforebirth.
61

Theresultis majordisorders of muscletone(oftencalledspasticity)andavarietyofinvolun-
tarymovements.
Thefinalcommonpathwayforallmotor systems –themotorneuron
Allmotorcontrolsystems actthroughthemotorneurons:thefinalpathwaytomuscles.Large
(alpha)motorneurons intheventralhornofthespinalcordactivatetheskeletalmuscles of
thelimbs andtrunk.Similar alphamotor neurons inthemidbrainandhindbrainactivatethe
voluntarymuscles ofthehead.Eachalphamotor neuronis connectedtomanyfibers ina
skeletalmuscle.Whenthealphamotor neuronfires,allofthefibers towhichitis connected
willcontract.Themotorunitis thecombinationof asinglealphamotorneuronandthemus-
clefibers towhichitconnects.Activatingalphamotor neurons is theonlywaytocauseskele-
talmusclefibers tocontract.As aresult,allthemotor controlsystems describedabove
achievetheireffects bystimulatingorsuppressingalphamotorneurons.TheEnglishphysiol-
ogistandNobelprizewinner,Charles Sherrington,coinedtheterm' finalcommonpathway' to
describetheroleofalphamotorneurons.
Questions forrepetition
- Of whatparts does thestriatumconsistof?
- Describethecourseofthecorticospinaltract.
- Whathappens whenthecorticospinaltractis damaged?
- How is theglobus pallidus separatedfromthethalamus?
- How is thesubstantianigraconnectedtothestriatum?
62

SENSORY SYSTEM
The somatosory system
Somaticsensations comefromtheskin,muscles,joints,andbones.Somaticsensations from
theheadtraveltothebrain steminthetrigeminalnerve,whereas thosebelow theheadtravel
inspinalnerves tothespinalcord.Somaticsensations fromtheskinaretouch,deeppressure,
pain,andtemperature.
Somatosensory pathways in the spinal cord
Boththespinothalamictracts andthedorsalcolumns (gracileandcuneatefasciculi)convey
somatosensoryinformationfromonesideof thebodytothecerebralcortexoftheopposite
sideviathethalamus.Eachofthesesystems is basicallyachainofthreeneurons:thefirst
neuronis adorsalrootganglioncellwithits centralprocess enteringthespinalcordtoascend
forsomedistancebeforeitsynapses withthesecondneuroninthechain;theaxonofthesec-
ondneuroncrosses themidlineimmediatelyandascends tothethalamus;thethirdneuron
sends its axonfromthethalamus tothecerebralcortex.
Thepainandtemperature-sensitivefibers (spinothalamictract)cross themidlineafew seg-
ments abovethelevelatwhichtheyenter thespinalcord.Incontrast,finetouchandproprio-
ceptionfibers (dorsalcolumn-mediallemniscus pathway)donotcross untiltheyreachthe
hindbrain.
Thespinalsomatosensorypathways.Touch anddeep pressuresensations arecarriedin the
dorsalcolumn-medicallemniscus system.Pain andtemperaturesensations arecarriedin
thespinothalamicsystem.
Thedorsalcolumntracts carrytouch,deeppressure,proprioceptive,andvibrationsenseinfor-
mationinthegracileandcuneatefasciculi-thegracilefasciculus mainlyconveys information
fromthehindlimb.Thecuneatefasciculus conveys informationfromtheforelimb.
63

Dorsal column-medial lemniscus pathway
This is themaintouchpathway.Ittransmits signals fromlow-thresholdmechanoreceptors in
theskin,muscles,andjoints.This enables tactilediscrimination,vibrationdetection,and
proprioception(senseofpositionfromjointandmusclereceptors).
Themaintouchpathway's first-order(primary) neurons arelocatedinthedorsalrootganglia.
Theaxons oftheganglion cells carryinginformationfromthelowerlimbs formthegracile
fasciculus,whileintheupperextremities,theyformthecuneatefasciculus.Thetwofasciculi
arecollectivelyknownas thedorsalcolumns.
Thedorsalcolumnaxons ascendtothehindbrain,wheretheyterminateinthegracileand
cuneatenuclei.Theaxons leavingthecells of thegracileandcuneatenucleicross themidline
andformacompactbundlecalledthemediallemniscus.Themediallemniscus ascends
throughthebrainstemtosynapsewiththird-order neurons intheventroposteriornucleus of
thethalamus.Thethalamicneurons sendtheiraxons totheprimarysomatosensorycortexin
thepostcentralgyrus.
Spinothalamic tracts
Therearetwospinothalamictracts,lateralandventral.Informationaboutpain
andtemperatureis conveyedbythelateralspinothalamictract,whiletheventral
spinothalamictractconveys touchsensation.Thefirst-orderneurons ofthespinothalamicsys-
temarelocatedinthespinalganglia.Theaxons oftheseganglioncells enterthespinalcord
andascendforafew segments beforetheysynapsewithsecond-orderneurons inthesubstan-
tiagelatinosaofthedorsalhorn.Theaxons of thesecond-orderneurons cross themidlinein
theanteriorwhitecommissureofthespinalcordtoformthespinothalamictracts.Thecrossed
painandtemperatureneurons formthelateralspinothalamictractinthelateralcolumnofthe
spinalcord.Incontrast,thecrossedtouchneurons formtheventralspinothalamictractinthe
ventralcolumnofthespinalcord.
Thespinothalamictracts ascendalongthespinallengthandthentravelthroughthebrainstem
untiltheyreachthethalamus.Inthethalamus,theysynapsewiththird-orderneurons inthe
ventroposteriornucleus.Theaxons of theventroposteriorthalamicneurons traveltothesoma-
tosensorycortex.
The cranial somatosensory system
Almostallcranialsomatosensoryfibers intheheadtravelinthetrigeminalnerve.Thefirst-
ordertrigeminalsensoryneurons arelocatedinthetrigeminalganglionintheskullbase.The
trigeminalganglionaxons enter thehindbrainthroughthesideofthebasilarpons.Someof
thesefibers synapseintheprincipaltrigeminalsensorynucleus,whichlies atthelevelof
entryof thetrigeminalnerve.However,manyof thefibers descendinthehindbrainforcon-
siderabledistances beforetheymakecontactwithsecond-orderneurons.Someofthedes-
cendingfibers travelas faras upper cervicalsegments beforetheysynapse.
Thedescendingtrigeminalfibers formthespinaltrigeminaltract,andthetrigeminalnuclear
groups caudaltotheprincipalnucleus arecalledthenucleus ofthespinaltrigeminaltract.
Trigeminalfibers carrying touchsensationsynapseintheprincipalsensorynucleus andthe
rostralpartofthespinaltrigeminalnucleus.Whereas thosecarryingpainandtemperaturesen-
sationsynapseinthecaudalpartofthespinaltrigeminalnucleus.
Theaxons oftheneurons oftheprincipalsensorynucleus andthespinaltrigeminalnucleus
cross themidlineandascendtothemedialpartoftheventroposteriornucleus thalamus.The
ventroposteriornucleus sends its axons totheinferiorhalfofthepostcentralgyrus.
The primary somatosensory cortex
Theprimarysomatosensorycortexis locatedinthepostcentralgyrus,inBrodmannareas 3,1,
and2.Thesomatosensoryinformationreachingthepostcentralgyrus is topicallyorganized.
Eachindividualregionofthebodyis representedinaseparateareaonthegyrus,withthe
headatthebottomandthelower limbatthetop.
64

Theprimarysomatosensorycortex(S1),which lies in thepostcentralgyrus.
Thesomatotopicallyorganizedrepresentation ofbodysensations on thepostcentralgyrus.
Questions for repetition
- What information is summarised as the somatosensory system?
- How many neurons make up most somatosensory pathways?
- Where do the fibers that transmit information about temperature cross?
- How is touch sensation transmitted from the face?
- Which Broadmann areas does the primary somatosensory cortex com-
prise?
65

The visual system
Theeyecollects visualinformationtosendtothebrain.Beforereachingtheretina,light
passes throughthecornea, aqueous humor,lens,andvitreous humor.Visualimages arefo-
cusedbythecorneaandlens beforetheyreachtheretina.Theretinais enclosedinathick
fibrous layercalledthesclera.
Adiagramoftheeye.
Thelightreceptorcells oftheretina,therods andcones,lieinthedeepestlayeroftheretina,
solightmustpass throughthesurfacelayers of theretinabeforeitreaches thereceptors.
Thehumanretinais intheformofadeepcup.Its outlinerepresents aboutthree-quarters ofa
spherewithadiameterof22mm.Thehumanretinacontains about7millionconecells and
about700millionrodcells.Theconecells areconcentratedinacentralareacalledthemac-
ula.Theyareresponsibleforhighacuityandcolor vision.Thereareveryfew rodcells inthe
macula.Cones aresensitivetobrightlightandfallintothreecategories thatrespondtolight
inthespectrum's red,green,orblueparts.Therodcells donotdiscriminatebetweencolors.
Instead,they aresensitivetodimlightandreactquicklytomovingobjects enteringthevisual
field.
Justmedialtothemaculais anareawheretheaxons leavetheretinaformingtheopticnerve.
Therearenophotoreceptors inthis area,soitcreates ablindspotontheretina,about1.5-2.0
mmindiameter.
The retinal cell layers
Thecells oftheretinaarearrangedindistinctlayers,themostprominentofwhicharethe
photoreceptorlayer,thebipolar layer,andtheganglioncelllayer.As notedabove,the
photoreceptorlayeris thedeepestlayer oftheretina–furthestfromtheentrypathoflightrays.
Thereceptorcells inthis layer aretherods andcones.Thelight-sensitiveprocesses ofthe
rods arepartlyembeddedinthepigmentedepitheliallayer.Superficialtothephotoreceptor
layer is thebipolarlayer.Thebipolar cells receiveinformationfromphotoreceptors andsend
signals toganglioncells.Amacrinecells andhorizontalcells arealsolocatedinthebipolar
layer.Thefunctionoftheamacrineandhorizontalcells is tomodulatethesignals reachingthe
bipolarcells.Theganglion celllayer lies onthesuperficialsurfaceoftheretina.Ganglion
cells arethelargestcells in theretinabecausetheyhavelongaxons thattraveltothebrainin
theopticnerve.Theganglioncellaxons intheopticnervereachcenters inthehypothalamus
(thesuprachiasmaticnucleus),thalamus (thelateralgeniculatenucleus),andthesuperiorcol-
liculus of themidbrain.
66

Thelayers oftheretina.On theleftis aphotomicrograph ofasection through theretina
with theganglion celllayer aboveandthephotoreceptor layer below.Adiagramshowing
theconnections between photoreceptors,bipolar cells,andganglion cells is on theright.
Theintrinsicnetworks oftheretinaarecapableofsignificantsignalprocessingandconsolida-
tionof information.Forexample,ganglioncells ontheedges oftheretinareceiveinformation
fromahundredormorerodcells,thus increasingsensitivitytodimlight.Bycontrast,gan-
glioncells inthemaculaofahumanretinareceiveinputfromonlytwoorthreecones,en-
ablingtheretinatoresolvefinedetail.
The organization of the projection from the retina to the brain
Theganglioncellaxons fromeachofthetwohalves oftheretinaprojecttodifferentsides of
thebrain.Theaxons fromthemedial(nasal) half cross themidlinetoprojecttotheopposite
sideofthebrain,whereas theaxons fromthelateral(temporal)halfprojecttothesamesideof
thebrain.
Becauselightreaches theretinathroughabiconvexlens,theimagereachingtheretinais re-
versed.This means thatthelightreceivedfromthetemporalhalfofthevisualfieldfalls upon
thenasalparts ofeachretinaandviceversa.Theimagefromeachtemporalvisualfield(nasal
retina)crosses inthechiasmtocontinuetoreachthethalamus andcortexontheoppositeside
ofthebrain.Theimagefromeachnasalvisualfield(temporalretina)remains uncrossedand
continues toreachthethalamus andcortexof thesamesideas theretina.Theoutcomeis that
theleft-handsides ofthevisualfields of botheyes runintherightoptictract,andtheright-
handsides ofthevisualfields of botheyes runtogetherintheleftoptictract.Theoverallres-
ultis thateachvisualcortexreceives informationfromtheoppositeside's visualfields.In
otherwords,therightsideof theretinaof botheyes (temporalretinaoftherighteyeandnasal
retinaof thelefteye)projects totherightvisualcortex,andviceversa.
67

Adiagramshowingtherepresentation of thevisualfields on theretina,thelateralgenicu-
late,andthevisualcortex.Theoveralleffectis thattherighthalfofthevisualfieldis rep-
resentedin thevisualcortexandviceversa.
Questions for repetition
- Describethepathoflightthroughtheeye.
- Whatis thecharacteristicstimulus for arod?
- Whatcauses theblindspot?
- Of whatlayers does theretinaconsistof?
- Whatis theanatomicalstructureofthevisualpathway?
68

The auditory system
Theearcollects soundinformationtosendtothebrainviathevestibulocochlearnerve.
Theearconsists ofthreeparts:theexternalearconsistingofthepinna,theauditorycanal,and
thetympanicmembrane(eardrum);themiddleear,whichcontains thethreeauditoryossicles;
theinnerear, whichcontains thecochlea.
Soundenters theexternalear through theauditorycanalandcauses thetympanicmem-
branetovibrate.This vibration is transmittedacross themiddleear bythreetinybones,the
malleus,incus,andstapes.Thestapes transmits thevibration tofluidin theinternalear,
andthesevibrations eventuallyreach thecochlea.Thecochleais abonyshellthatcontains
thesoundreceptors.Notethatthemiddleear is connectedtothebackofthethroatbyan
air-filledcanalcalledtheEustachian tube,or pharyngotympanictube.
Thethreeauditoryossicles arenamedthemalleus,incus,andstapes.Theyformasetoflevers
thatmechanicallytransmits soundfromthetympanicmembranetotheovalwindow ofthein-
ner ear.Soundwaves reach theinnerear thenreachreceptorhaircells inthecochlea.The
cochleais abonycaseshapedlikeaspiralseashell.Itcontains theauditoryreceptorcells,
whichconvertsoundinformationintonerveimpulses.
Insidethecochleararethreespiraltubes,thescalavestibuli,thescalamedia,andthescala
tympani.Eachofthesethreetubes is filledwithfluid.Thescalamediacontains theauditory
receptor apparatus (theorganof Corti),whichsits onthebasilarmembrane.Theouterhair
cells oftheorganofCortiarethereceptor cells thatareconnectedtosensoryaxons.
Theorganof Cortiis tonotopicallyorganized.Thehaircells respondtodifferentsoundfre-
quencies accordingtotheirpositioninthecochlea.Thehaircells atthebaseofthecochleare-
spondtohighfrequencies,andthehair cells attheapexofthecochlearespondtolow fre-
quencies.
69

Insidethecochleaareneuronalreceptors groupedin astructurecalledtheorgan ofCorti.
Thecochleacontains threefluid-filledtubes,anditis themiddleoneofthese,thescalame-
dia,which houses theorgan ofCorti.Hair cells in theorgan ofCortidetectsoundvibra-
tions,andtheinformation is transmittedtothehindbrain bytheauditory(cochlear)nerve.
Thecellbodies ofthecochlear nervefibers arelocatedin thespiralganglion,which is em-
beddedin thebonystructureof thecochlea.
Thecellbodies oftheauditoryreceptor neurons,whichareconnectedtotheorganofCorti,
arelocatedinthespiralganglion,whichis inthecenterofthecochlea.Eachspiralganglion
cellhas anincomingaxonprocess connectedtotheorganofCortiandanoutgoingaxonpro-
cess thattravels intheauditorynervetothebrainstem.
Theauditorynerveaxons terminateinthecochlear nucleiinthehindbrain.Thecochlearnuc-
leiprojecttothesuperiorolivarycomplex.Fromthere,theauditoryinformationis senttothe
inferiorcolliculus ofthemidbrain,whereitis further processedbeforebeingsenttotheme-
dialgeniculatenucleus inthethalamus.Themedialgeniculateprojects totheprimaryaudit-
orycortex(A1)ontheuppersurfaceofthesuperiortemporalgyrus.Theauditorypathway
faithfullymaintains thefrequencymapfromthecochleatothecortexsothattheauditoryrep-
resentationthatreaches theprimaryauditorycortexis stilltonotopicallyorganized.
Thebrainstemauditorycenters of bothsides areinterconnectedacross themidline.This bilat-
eralnetworkallows thebraintoworkoutthepositionofanincomingsound.Becauseofthese
interconnections betweenthebrainstemauditorynuclei,theprimaryauditorycortexreceives
informationfrombothears.
70

Theauditorypathwayfromthecochleatotheprimaryauditorycortex(A1).
Ganglion cells in thespiralganglion receiveinformation fromtheorgan ofCorti,andthis
information is transmittedcentrallytothecochlear nuclei.Each cochlear nucleus is con-
nectedtoneurons in thesuperior olivarynucleiofboth sides.Thesuperior olivarynuclei
sendaxons totheinferior colliculus ofthemidbrain,which is in turn connectedtotheme-
dialgeniculatenucleus ofthethalamus.Thegeniculatemedicalprojects totheprimary
auditorycortex
Questions for repetition
- How is theinnerearstructured?
- Inwhichanatomicalstructurearethesensoryreceptors forthe"soundwaves" embedded?
- Whatis theanatomicalstructureoftheauditorypathway?
- Whichthalamicnucleus is involvedintheauditorypathway?
71

The vestibular system
Thename'vestibular' comes fromthevestibule,which is asmallbonyspaceintheinnerear
inwhichthevestibularreceptors arelocated.Thevestibuleis nexttothecochlea,andthetwo
structures togetherarehousedinthebonylabyrinthof theinnerear.
Themainfunctions ofthevestibular systemaretomaintainbalanceandcoordinateeye
movementwiththeheadandbodyposition.Thesefunctions aremanagedatareflexlevel,
with
constantadjustments beingmadetoposturalmuscles andeyemovement.Inputfromthe
vestibularsystemenables theeyes totrackanobjectofinterest,evenwhenthebodymoves
unpredictably.Eyemovementcoordinationuses anetworkthatinterconnects thevestibular
systemwiththevisualsystem,thecerebellum,thespinalcord,andthemotorneurons that
controltheeyemuscles.
As wellas controllingthis complexreflexnetwork,thevestibularsystemsupplies information
tothecerebralcortexaboutthebody's positioninspace.This helps togiveus aconscious ap-
preciationofthepositionof thebodyinspace.Thesomatosensorysystemalsoprovides vital
informationonbodypositionthatcontributes toourabilitytomaintainpostureandbalance.
Someofthepositionsenseinformationfromthesomatosensorysystemcomes fromtouchre-
ceptors intheskinanddeeppressurereceptors inthefeet.
The semicircular canals
Thevestibulecontains twoquiteseparatesystems for gatheringinformationonheadposition.
Onesystem,basedonthesemicircularcanals,detects movementoftheheadinanydirection.
Incontrast,theothersystem,basedonthesacculeandutriclesystem,is designedtoregister
thepositionoftheheadwhenitis notmoving.Therefore,thesemicircularcanalsystemcan
bedescribedas thedynamicvestibularsystem,andthesaccule/utriclesystemcanbede-
scribedas thestaticvestibular system.
Overviewofthevestibular system.
72

Semicircular canals
Thesemicircularcanals arethreealmostcircular tubes containingafluidcalledendolymph.
Endolymphis alsofoundin thecochlearductincontactwithauditoryhaircells.Eachsemi-
circularcanalis placedinadifferentspatialplane–onehorizontal,oneverticalclosetothe
sagittalplane,andoneverticalclosetothecoronalplane.Nomatterwhatdirectionthehead
moves in,itwillcausefluidtomovearoundinoneor moreofthethreecanals.Eachcanalhas
awidenedareacalledtheampulla,whichcontains sensitivehaircells.Theprocesses ofthe
haircells areembeddedin apieceof jellycalledthecupula.Whenthefluidmoves inresponse
toheadmotion,thecupulais draggedinthedirectionoffluidmovement,twistingthepro-
cesses ofthehaircells.Thetwistinggenerates anelectricalsignal,whichis carriedtothe
hindbrainbythevestibularnerve.
Thehair cells ofeach semicircular canalarelocatedin theampulla.Theciliaofthehair
cells detectthemovementoftheendolymph.Theinformation gatheredbythehair cells is
gatheredbytheaxons ofthevestibular ganglion cells.Thevestibular ganglion cells areun-
usualin thattheyaretruebipolar ganglion cells,notpseudounipolar cells as in theso-
matosensoryandauditorysystems.Thecentralaxon ofthevestibular ganglion cellcon-
nects with thevestibular nucleiin thehindbrain.
73

Schematicoverviewofthevestibular pathways.
Saccule and utricle
Thesaccule-utriclesystemis containedinapair ofrecesses inthevestibule.Thesacculeand
utricleeachhaveapatchofhair cells calledamacula.Theprocesses ofthesehaircells are
embeddedinaplateofjelly,as arethoseof thesemicircularcanals,butinthis case,thejelly
contains calciumcarbonatecrystals calledotoliths.Thecalcium-containingjellyplateis
calledtheotolithmembrane.Whentheheadis stationary,theweightofthecalcium-filledoto-
liths pulls thehaircells undertheinfluenceof gravity,andthis,inturn,causes thehaircells to
bestimulated.Otherexternalforces suchas rapidaccelerationcanalsostimulatethehaircells
inthemacula.Thereceptorclusters of thesacculeand utriclearesetatrightangles toeach
othersothattheycanestablishthehead's positionatalltimes.Themaculaofthesacculeis set
intheverticalplane,soitis bestplacedtodetectflexionandextensionmovements ofthe
head.Themaculaoftheutricleis setinthehorizontalplane,soitis bestplacedtodetectlat-
eraltiltingofthehead.Theinformationgatheredbythereceptors ofthesacculeandutricleis
carriedtothehindbrainbythevestibular nerve.
74

Vestibular nuclei
Thevestibularnucleiofthehindbrainoccupyalargeareainthefloorofthefourthventricle.
Theyarestronglyconnectedwiththecerebellum,thespinalcord,andwiththesystemthat
controls eyemovement.Thevestibularconnectiontotheneckandeyemuscles ensures that
headandeyepositions areconstantlylinkedtogether.Themediallongitudinalfasciculus is
thebrainstempathwaylinkingtheeyemusclenucleiandthevestibularnuclei.Thecloserela-
tionshipbetweenthevestibular receptors andeyemovementcanbedemonstratedbyspinning
someonearound.Ifyousitsomeoneinarotatingofficechairandspinthemaroundtentimes
atamoderatespeed,thenstopthemabruptly,youwillseetheeyes flickfromsidetosideina
movementcallednystagmus.Theeyemovementhappens becausethefluidinthehorizontal
semicircularcanalis stillmovingwhenthechair stops moving,andtheeyemusclecontrol
systemthinks thattheheadis stillmoving.Itthereforeresponds withtheside-to-sidemove-
mentoftheeyes.Thesubjectwillalsocomplainthattheroomseems tobespinningaround
them;this sensationis calledvertigo.
Itis crucialtodistinguishthesensationof vertigofromdizziness.Dizziness is afeelingofun-
steadiness,whileinvertigo,theworldseems tobemovingaroundyou.Vertigois oftenac-
companiedbyfeelings ofnauseaandmaybeassociatedwithvomitinginseverecases.
Vestibulospinal tracts
Twoimportantdescendingtracts arisefromthevestibularnuclei–theuncrossedlateral
vestibulospinaltract,which reaches allspinalcordlevels,andthecrossedmedialvestibu-
lospinaltract,whichends inthecervicalspinalcord.Themedial
vestibulospinaltractis primarilyresponsivetoinputfromthesemicircularcanals,anditcon-
nects withtheneckmuscles tocontrolheadposition.Thelateralvestibulospinaltractis
mainlyresponsivetoinformationfromthesacculeandutricle;its primaryroleis toadjust
postureinthelimbs andtrunkbyactivatingextensormuscles tomaintainbalance.
Vestibular representation in the cerebral cortex
Whilethemainfunctionofthevestibularsystemis theautomaticcontrolof
bodyandeyeposition,thecerebralcortexreceives vestibularinformation
,whichcontributes toaconscious perceptionof bodyposition.Themain
areareceivingvestibularinformationinmonkeys is locatedbetweentheventral
partoftheprimarysomatosensorycortexandtheinsula.Itis assumedthat
anequivalentareaexists inhumans.Becausetheprimarysomatosensory
cortexis inthepostcentralgyrus of theparietallobe,this areais referredtoas
theparietal-insularvestibular cortex.Theinputtothis areais notexclusivelyvestibular;it
alsoreceives informationfromthevisualsystemandfromposition-sensereceptors inthe
neck.
Questions for repetition
- Whatarethetwosystems for determiningheadposition?
- Whatarethedifferences betweenthesetwosystems?
- Whichbrainstempathwayconnects thecontroloftheeyemuscles andthevestibularnu-
clei?
- Whatis theprimaryfunctionof thelateralvestibulospinaltract?
75

Olfaction
Inmostmammals,thesenseof smell(olfaction) plays acriticalroleinrecognizingpredators,
partners,andoffspring.Theolfactorysystemhas becomeless importantinhumans because
werelyonahighlydevelopedvisualsystem.However,itis notoftenrealizedthatagreatdeal
ofwhatwecalltasteis actuallybasedonolfactorysignals.Whenwehaveanasalinfection,
andtheolfactoryreceptors areinjuredorblocked,weloseabout90%ofourabilitytoappre-
ciateflavors.Inmanyanimals,olfactoryinputtotheamygdalacaninitiateemotionalre-
sponses,includingaggression.
Theolfactoryepitheliumofthenasalcavityconverts informationonodors intocodedneural
signals.Olfactoryreceptorneurons intheroof ofthenosearesubjecttocontinualdamage,
andinrodents,theyhaveanaveragelifespanof only40days.Becauseof
this,theyhavetobeconstantlyreplenishedfromstemcells.Eacholfactoryreceptorneuron
sends anunmyelinatedaxonthroughholes intheethmoidboneintheroofofthenoseto
reachtheolfactorybulb.
Themain olfactoryprojection is diagrammaticallyshown on theleftofthepicture.Fibers
fromtheolfactorybulbtravelin theolfactorytracttoreach theprimaryolfactorycortex
(piriformcortex),theentorhinalcortex,andpartof theamygdala.Therightsideofthedia-
gramshows theaccessoryolfactorypathway,which does notexistin humans butis an im-
portantstructurein manymammals.
Inadditiontothemainolfactorysystem,manymammals (butnothumans)haveasecondol-
factorysystemconcernedwithdetectingpheromones.Pheromones aresignalingchemicals re-
leasedintotheenvironmenttocausebehavioralchanges innearbyindividuals.Insects use
pheromones tosignalawiderangeofsituations,includingsexualreadiness,alarm,andto
markatrail.Mostmammals haveasmallpheromonedetectingsystemcalledtheaccessory
olfactorysystem.Itis primarilyrelatedtosexualsignaling.This systemis notpresentinhu-
mans.
Thepheromone-sensitiveareainthenoseis calledthevomeronasalorgan.Removalofthe
vomeronasalorganinjuvenilemalemicedoes notimpairfood-findingabilities butdoes
76

impair theirabilitytorecognizesexualsignals frompotentialmates.Axons ofreceptorneur-
ons inthevomeronasalorganprojectexclusivelytotheaccessoryolfactorybulb(AOB)adja-
centtothemainolfactorybulb.Theoutputoftheaccessoryolfactorybulbis toaspecialnuc-
leus superficialtotheamygdala,calledthebednucleus oftheaccessoryolfactorytract.
Projections from the olfactory receptors to the brain
Nervefibers connectedtotheolfactoryreceptor cells intheroofofthenoseformtwelveto
twentyolfactorynervebundles.Thesenervebundles travelthroughaseries ofbonycanals in
theethmoidbonetoreachtheolfactorybulbontheventralsideofthefrontallobe.Because
theolfactorysystemis anextensionoftheforebrainandnotatypicalnerve,itis surrounded
bymeninges andcerebrospinalfluid.Fractures of thebonyroofofthenosecanthereforeres-
ultinmeningealtears andcerebrospinalfluidleakage.Thefluidleaks outthroughthenose,
andthemeningealtearcan resultinpotentiallyfatalbacterialinfectioninthecerebrospinal
fluidspacearoundthebrain.
Fibers of theolfactorybulbcontinuetoformtheolfactorytract,whichlies inagrooveonthe
ventralsurfaceofthefrontallobe.Theolfactorytractends bydividingintoamedialandalat-
eralbranch.Thelargerlateralbranch(calledthelateralolfactorytract)ends mainlyinthe
primaryolfactorycortex.Theprimaryolfactorycortexis traditionallycalledthepiriformcor-
tex.Inhumans,theprimaryolfactorycortexis locatedinagyrus calledtheuncus.Theuncus
is themostrostralpartoftheparahippocampalgyrus ofthemedialsideofthetemporallobe.
Theuncus sits onthemedialsurfaceoftheamygdalaandis rostraltothehippocampus.
Someolfactorytractfibers cross intheanterior commissurepathwaytoconnectoneolfactory
bulbtothatoftheoppositeside.
Thebloodsupplytotheuncus canbecutoff duringadifficultbirthwhenpressureonthehead
duringlaborpushes thetemporallobeagainsttheduralroofofthecerebellum.This candam-
agetheunderlyingamygdalaandmayresultinanatypicalformofepilepsylaterinlife,called
temporallobeepilepsyoruncinateepilepsy.
Theolfactoryventricleis asmallspacefilledwithcerebrospinalfluidinthemiddleoftheol-
factorybulb.Itis formedfromanextensionof thelateralventricle.Inrodents,anareadirectly
under thelateralventricle,thesubventricular zone,produces stemcells thatmigrateforward
fromthelateralventricleintotheolfactorybulb.Theyprovideacontinualsourceofnew
neurons fortheolfactorysystemthroughoutadultlife.This cellgroupis calledtherostralmi-
gratorystream.Therostralmigratorystreamandthehippocampus aretheonlyplaces where
postnatalneurogenesis occurs inthebrain.Arostralmigratorystreamhas beenshowninthe
postnatalhumanbrain,butitis relativelysmallandbecomes evensmalleras thebrainma-
tures.
77

Theolfactory(piriform)cortexis in agyrus calledtheuncus.Itlies attherostraltipofthe
parahippocampalgyrus ofthetemporallobe.Theolfactorycortexis superficialtotheamy-
gdalaandis rostraltothehippocampus.Theworduncus means ahook,which describes
theshapeofthis smallgyrus.
Questions for repetition
- Which sense is extremely closely related to the sense of smell?
- How can mammals also perceive pheromones?
- Is the olfactory nerve built like a peripheral nerve?
- What is the primary olfactory cortex in humans called?
- Are the receptor neurons of the sense of smell a stable tissue?
78

Taste
Tastereceptors inthetonguesendinformationviathefacialandglossopharyngealnerves to
thehindbrain.Thetastereceptors of theanterior two-thirds ofthetongueareconnectedwith
sensoryfibers ofthefacialnerve.Thetastereceptors oftheposteriorthirdofthetongueare
connectedwithsensoryfibers of theglossopharyngeal.Notsurprisingly,thefacialandglos-
sopharyngealnerves alsocontrolthesalivaryglands.Theglossopharyngealnervesupplies the
largeparotidgland,andthefacialsupplies thesmallersubmandibularandsublingualglands
withparasympatheticsecretomotor fibers.
Thetastesensoryfibers inthefacialandglossopharyngealnerves formadistinctbundleinthe
hindbraincalledthesolitarytract,whichlies betweenthedorsalnucleus ofthevagus andthe
spinalvestibularnucleus.Thehindbraintastenucleus surroundingthesolitarytractis called
thenucleus ofthesolitarytract.
Thesolitarytractstands outin this hindbrain section becauseitis madeupofdark-stained
myelinatedfibers in an otherwisecellular areaoccupiedbycranialnervenuclei(arrow).
Thenucleus ofthesolitarytractprojects tothemedialpartoftheventroposteriornucleus of
thethalamus andthetasteinformationis thensentfromthethalamus totheinsularcortexand
thefrontaloperculum.
Thetastereceptors inthetonguehaveonlyalimitedrangeofperception(salt,sweet,sour,
bitter,andumami),andmuchofwhatwethinkofas 'taste' is actuallybasedoninformation
fromtheolfactorysystem.Odors fromfoodinthemouthreachtheolfactoryreceptors inthe
roofofthenose.Theimportanceoftheolfactoryinformationinappreciatingthetasteoffood
becomes obvious whenan infectionblocks olfactoryreceptioninthenose,suchas happens
withthecommoncold.Withnoolfactoryreception,foodseems tolosealmostallits taste.
Questions for repetition
- Whichnerves innervatethetastecells of thetongue?
- Whatis thenameofthefusionofthenervefibers ofthetastecellinnervatingnerves?
- Whycanwetasteworsewhenwehaveacold?
79

THE AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
The autonomic nervous system (ANS)
Theeffectorsystems thatcontroltheinternalorgans,glands,andbloodvessels arecollec-
tivelycalledtheautonomicmotorsystembecausemostoftheirfunctions areautomaticand
involuntary.Theycanalsobecalledthevisceralmotorsystemtodistinguishitfromtheso-
maticmotorsystemthatcontrols thevoluntarymuscles.Theautonomicmotorsystemis di-
videdintosympatheticand parasympatheticgroups basedonfunctionandanatomy.Thesym-
patheticgroupis involvedinthecontrolof thearterialsystemandemergency(fightorflight)
responses.Incontrast,theparasympatheticgroupcontrols thenormalday-to-dayfunctions of
theinternalorgans,suchas salivationanddigestion. Finally,thelocalneuronnetworks which
coordinatetheactions ofthestomachandintestines areoftengroupedunderthenameenteric
nervous system.
Locationof thesympatheticandparasympatheticmotorcenters
Whereas themotorneurons thatsupplythevoluntarymuscles arefoundinallregions ofthe
brainstemandspinalcord, theautonomicmotorcenters occupyonlyrestrictedareas:the
sympatheticmotorcenters areonlylocatedinthoracicandupperlumbarspinalcordsegments
(T1toL2),andtheparasympatheticmotor centers areonlyfoundinthebrainstemandinthe
sacralspinalcord.Thecervicalspinalcord,thecoccygealspinalcord,andmostofthelumbar
spinalcordcontainneithersympatheticnor parasympatheticmotorcenters.Therestrictedori-
ginofthesympatheticandparasympatheticmotor systems poses achallengefordistribution
sinceeachsystemmustsupplystructures fromheadtotail.Thesympatheticandparasympa-
theticsystems possess differentsolutions todistributetheiractivitytoallappropriateparts of
thebody.
Thesympatheticsystemarises fromspinalnervesT2toL2,butitspreads its influence
throughthesympatheticchain,whichextends fromthebaseoftheskulltothepelvis.The
parasympatheticsystemhas its origins inthebrainstemandthesacralspinalcord.Therefore,
its solutionis throughthelongcourseofthevagus nerve,whichsupplies thoracicandabdom-
inalviscerafromthenecktothepelvis.Inthepelvis,itmeets thesacralparasympatheticout-
flow fromsacralnerves 2,3,and4.
80

Adiagramshowingthedistribution ofthesympatheticnervous system(in red)andthedis-
tribution oftheparasympatheticnervous system(in blue).
Autonomicganglia
Inthesomaticmotoroutflow,asinglemotor neuronconnects thebrainstemorspinalcordto
atargetmuscle,whereas,intheautonomicnervous system,themotoroutflow is formedbya
two-neuronchain.Thefirstautonomicmotor neuroninthechainis locatedinsidethebrain-
stemor spinalcord;itsends its axontoasecondeffectorneuronlocatedinaganglionoutside
ofthecentralnervous system.Theaxonofthesecond neurontheninnervates thetargetorgan.
Thetwo-neuronsystemenables asingleautonomicmotorneurontotriggerhundreds ofgan-
glioniceffectorneurons,producingwidespreadeffects,suchas arterialconstrictiontoraise
bloodpressure.
Becausethesecondmotorneurons intheautonomicchainareclusteredtogetheringanglia,
thefirstneuronis calledpreganglionic,andthesecondneuronis calledganglionic.Inthecase
ofthesympatheticnervous system,thegangliaareclosetothespinalcord,sothepregan-
glioniccells haveonlyshortaxons,andtheganglionicneuronaxons arelong.Inthecaseof
theparasympatheticnervous system,themotorgangliaarelocatedveryclosetothetargetor-
gans (someareevenembeddedinthewalls ofthetargetorgans),andsotheaxons ofthepre-
ganglioniccells areoftenrelativelylong,andtheganglionicaxons areveryshort.
Functions ofthesympatheticnervous system
Thesympatheticnervous systemis oftendescribedas afightorflightsystem.Itrapidlymobi-
lizes criticalbodilysystems intimes ofemergencyor stress,preparingthebodyforactionby
raisingbloodpressure,relaxingandopeningairways, mobilizingenergysources,andtempo-
rarilyshuttingdowndigestion.Mostimportantly,itincreases bloodflow tomuscles byshut-
tingdownbloodflow totheskinandintestines.
Thesympatheticnervous systemcanincreaseits influenceoverthebloodvessels ofthebody
bytriggeringthereleaseofadrenalineandnoradrenalinefromtheadrenalmedulla.Thesetwo
hormones haveessentiallythesameeffectas thepostganglionicsympatheticnerves,butbe-
causetheyremaininthebloodstream,thesehormones amplifyandprolongthesympathetic
actions andcaninfluencecells thatarenotdirectlyinnervatedbysympatheticnerves.
81

Sympatheticdistribution
Thepreganglionicsympatheticneurons arefoundonlyinthemiddleregionofthespinalcord,
fromthesecondthoracicsegmenttothefirstlumbarsegment.Distributiontomorerostraland
caudalareas ofthebodyis achievedbytheexistenceofthesympatheticchain–alongsystem
ofnerves thatruns alongsidethebodies ofthevertebrae.Thesympatheticmotorgangliaare
embeddedinthis chain,withapproximatelytwentygangliaoneachside.Fromtheganglia,
postganglionicsympatheticfibers aredistributedtoalllevels oftheheadandtrunkandalsoto
thelimbs.
Functions oftheparasympatheticnervous system
Theparasympatheticnervous systemis responsibleforthenormalday-to-dayfunctions ofthe
internalorgans (arolewhichcanbedescribedas 'restanddigest').Parasympatheticactions on
thecardiovascularsystemareoppositetothoseof thesympatheticnervous system;the
parasympatheticoutflow lowers theheartrateandbloodpressure.Theparasympatheticner-
vous systemdoes notsend nerves tothelimbs,soits roleis restrictedtotheglands andorgans
oftheheadandtrunk.Itis alsoresponsiblefor penileerectionandbladderemptying.
Parasympatheticdistribution
Thecranialparasympatheticnerves supplythepupilandciliarymuscle(oculomotornerve),
smallsecretoryglands oftheeyeandnose,smallsalivaryglands (facialnerve),theparotid
gland(glossopharyngealnerve),andorgans of theneck,thoraxandabdomen(thevagus
nerve).Thevagus parasympatheticsupplygoes tothelarynx,esophagus,lungs,heart,stom-
ach,andthesmallandlargeintestines.Thesacralpreganglionicneurons supplyeffector neu-
rons inthesigmoidcolon,rectum,bladder,andgenitalia.
Transmittersubstances intheautonomicnervous system
Allsympatheticandparasympatheticpreganglionicmotorneurons arelikesomaticmotor
neurons inthattheyuseacetylcholineas their transmittersubstance.Theparasympathetic
ganglionicneurons arealsocholinergic.However,thesympatheticganglioniceffectorneu-
rons arenoradrenergic.
Higher autonomiccontrol
Themotorneurons oftheautonomicnervous systemareregulatedbycenters inthehypothal-
amus andbrainstem.Thesecenters controlvitalfunctions ofthecardiovascularandrespira-
torysystems,as wellas salivation,swallowing,digestionperistalsis,defecation,andurina-
tion.Atalevelabovethebrainstem,thehypothalamus triggers theseautonomicfunctional
centers as partofmoresignificantbehavioralresponses,suchas thoseinvolvedinaggression.
Angeris associatedwithincreases inheartrate,blood pressure,andrespiratoryrate.
Theentericnervous system(ENS)
Thenetworks ofneurons embeddedinthewallof thegut,whichregulateandcoordinateits
activity,arecalledtheentericnervous system.This subdivisionof theautonomicnervous sys-
temdeserves auniquenamebecauseitis solarge.Inhumans,itcontains 200-600million
neurons,morethanintheentirespinalcord.Theentericnervous systemcontrols thecontrac-
tions andsecretions ofthestomach,intestines,andotherdigestiveorgans.Althoughthecen-
tralautonomicnervous systeminfluences theENS,itis capableofindependentactionthrough
its ownreflexsystems.Theentericnervous systemis alsofunctionallylinkedtothebody's
immunesystemtohelpdefendagainstinvasivemicroorganisms inthegut.Inmanyways,the
entericnervous systemseems tobeevolutionarilyolderthanthecentralnervous system,pre-
sumablybecausefoodintakeanddigestionarepriorities forsimpleorganisms.
82

Theentericnervous systemuses abouttwentydifferenttransmittersubstances,themostim-
portantof whichareacetylcholine,vasoactiveintestinalpolypeptide(VIP),nitricoxide(NO),
GABA,andserotonin.Complexnetworks intheentericnervous systemcanlearntoadaptto
challenges intheabsenceofCNS control.InHirschsprung's disease,thereis acongenitalab-
senceofparasympatheticinnervationof thesigmoidcolon,whichmakes thesuffererunable
todefecate.Treatmentconsists of removalofthenon-innervatedregionofthecolon.Abouta
yearafter removingthedenervatedsection,theremainingcolonlearns todefecate.
Questions forrepetition
- How cantheautonomicnervous systembesubdivided?
- Withinwhichspinalcordsegments arethesympatheticmotorfibers located?
- How arethesympatheticganglialocatedinrelationtothespinalcordandeffectororgan?
- Namethreefunctions ofthesympatheticandparasympatheticnervous systems.
- Namethreeneurotransmitters thatplayaroleintheentericnervous system.
83

BLOOD SUPPLY TO THE BRAIN
The blood supply to the brain
Arterialsupply
Thearterialsupplytothebraincomes fromtwointernalcarotidarteries atthefrontandtwo
vertebralarteries attheback.Eachinternalcarotidarterydivides intoalargermiddlecerebral
arteryandasmalleranteriorcerebralartery.Thetwovertebralarteries jointoformthebasilar
artery,which supplies thebrainstem.Thebasilararterydivides toformthetwoposterior
cerebralarteries.Thecarotidandbasilarsystems arelinkedtogetherbysmallcommunicating
arteries toformanarterialcircle(thecircleofWillis) atthebaseofthebrain.
ThearterialcircleofWillis is formedbythetwoposterior cerebralarteries (branches ofthe
basilar artery)andbranches of theinternalcarotidartery(themiddlecerebralartery,
anterior cerebralartery.Theposterior andanterior communicatingarteries completethe
circle.
Themiddlecerebralarterysupplies mostof thelateralsurfaceofthecerebralcortex.The
anterior cerebralarterysupplies themedialsideof thefronthalfofthecortexandastrip
aroundtheanteriorandsuperior marginof thelateralcortex.Theposteriorcerebralartery
supplies mostoftheoccipitallobe,includingthevisualcortex.
Thethreemaincerebralarteries senddeepperforatingbranches todeepcerebralstructures
(suchas theinternalcapsule) beforereachingtheir corticalbranches.
84

The arterial supply to the lateral cerebrum by the middle cerebral artery (red), the anterior
cerebralartery(green),andtheposterior cerebralartery(blue).
Venous drainageofthebrain
Theveinsofthecerebrumendinduralvenoussinusesthatsurroundthebrain.Theduralsinuses
areembeddedintheduramater,andtheydrainintotheinternaljugularvein.
The venous sinuses also drain the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) into the bloodstream. The CSF is
absorbedintothevenoussinusesthrougharachnoidgranulations,whichareevaginationsofthe
arachnoid mater. The most prominent dural sinuses are the superior sagittal sinus, the inferior
sagittalsinus, theoccipitalsinus,andthetransversesinus.
85

Venous drainage of the brain. The superior sagittal sinus collects blood from the lateral
aspectofthecerebralhemispheres.Thesuperiorsagittalsinusformstwotransversesinuses,
which drain into the internal jugular vein. The Inferior sagittal sinus forms the straight
sinus,which joins thejunction of thesuperior sagittalandtransversesinuses.
Questions forrepetition
- Whicharteries formtheCircleofWillis?
- Thespeechcenters areinthesupplyareaofwhich largerartery?
- Whatarethestructures calledinwhichthespinalfluidis absorbedintothevenous si-
nuses?
86

THE CIRCULATION OF CEREBROSPINAL FLUID
The cerebrospinal fluid and its circulation
Thebrainand spinalcordaresurroundedbythreemeningeallayers–athickdurallayernextto
thebone,athinarachnoidlayer deeptothedura,andathinpiallayeronthesurfaceofthe
brainandspinalcord.Thespacebetweenthearachnoidandthepia(thesubarachnoidspace)
is filledwithaclearliquidcalledcerebrospinalfluid(CSF).Thesoftstructureofthebrain
makes itvulnerabletomechanicaldamage;therefore,thecerebrospinalfluidacts as ashock
absorber toprotectitagainstinjury.
Overviewoftheventricular system;HenryGray(1918)AnatomyoftheHuman Body.
Circulation
TheCSF is manufacturedinsidethebrainbythechoroidplexuses ofthebrainventricularsys-
tem.Theventricularsystemof thecerebrumconsists oftwolateralventricles -oneinside
each cerebralhemisphere.Thelateralventricles drain intothethirdventricle,anarrow slit
betweenthetwohalves ofthehypothalamus andthalamus.TheCSF thentravels alongathin
tubeinthemidbraincalled theaqueduct.Theaqueductdrains intothefourthventricle,
betweenthecerebellumandthehindbrain.Finally,thefluidescapes throughthreeholes inthe
roofofthefourthventricletoreachthesubarachnoidspace.Cerebrospinalfluidis reabsorbed
intothebloodcirculationbyspecializedstructures in thewalls oflargeveins thatlinethein-
sideoftheskull.
87

Themainpartofthechoroidplexus lies inthemedialwallofthebodyandtheinferiorhornof
thelateralventricle.Nevertheless,groups of choroidplexus cells arepresentintheroofofthe
thirdventricleandtheroof ofthelowerhalfof thefourthventricleas well.Ifcerebrospinal
fluidcirculationis blocked,CSF willaccumulateintheventricularsystemofthecerebral
hemispheres.Graduallythecerebralventricles willbeforcedtoexpand,andcells inthe
cerebralcortexwillbekilledbycompression.This conditionis knownas hydrocephalus.
Theblood-brainbarrierandthecircumventricular organs
Theblood-brainbarrierprevents particular molecules inthebloodstreamfromreachingthe
brain's tissues.This systemhelps protectthebrainfrombacteria,viruses,andchemicaltoxins
thatcouldcausedamage.Theblood-brainbarrier is createdbymembranespecializations in
thewalls oftheendothelialcells of thebraincapillaries.Water-solublemolecules cannotpass
throughthecellularmembraneoftheendothelialcells andsoareunabletoreachtheextracel-
lularfluidofthebraintissues.However,smalllipid-solublemolecules cantravelthroughthe
membrane–afactorthatpromptedthedevelopmentof lipid-solubledrugs toreachthebrain.
Theblood–brainbarrieris notpresentinthecircumventricularorgans ofthebrain.Theseare
small,specializedareas in thewalls ofthethirdandfourthventricles.Neurons intheventricu-
larorgans areabletomonitorthelevels of certainchemicals inthebloodstream.
Questions forrepetition
-Whereisthespinalfluidformed?
-Describetheflowofspinalfluid.
-Inwhichareascanneuronsobtaininformationaboutchemicalcomponentsoftheblood?
88

STAINING AND IMAGING
Staining and imaging - Fundamentals
Informationaboutthedetailedstructureof thebrainandspinalcordcanbegatheredfromthe
microscopicstudyofthinsections thathavebeenstainedtoshow thepresenceofnervecells
andtheirprocesses.
Cutting thin sections
Thinsections canbecutfromfreshbraintissuethathas beenfrozen,butinmostcases,brain
sections arecollectedfrombraintissuethathas beenpreservedwithafixativechemicallike
formalin.Thinsections arecutwithamicrotome–aspecialslicingmachinecuttingsections
rangingfrom5to100micrometers (µm) inthickness. Formalin-fixedtissueis usuallypre-
paredfor sectioningbyembeddingitinparaffinwaxorcelloidin,butitcanalsobefrozenbe-
foresectioning.
Staining brain sections
Thetwoclassicstainingmethods aretheNisslstainforstainingneuroncellbodies andstains
formyelinatedaxons.Nisslstains useavarietyof dyes,suchas thioninandcresylviolet,to
revealdetails ofthecellbodyandnucleus ofneurons andglia.TheNisslstainis mostintense
innucleoliandintheroughendoplasmicreticulumofneurons.
In this Nissl-stainedsection ofrathippocampus,someneurons arepackedtightlytogether,
sotheyseemtoformacontinuous lineofvioletcolor.In other areas,cells can beseen like
grains of sandscatteredover theimage.Itis impossibletodistinguish between smallneur-
ons andgliaatthis magnification clearly.
Stains thatshow thepresenceof myelinhavebeenverywidelyusedinthestudyofhuman
brains for overacentury.Thestains canbeappliedto histologicalsections andthickslices of
thehumanbrain.Themyelinstains mostcommonlyusedaretheWeigertorLuxolfastblue
methods.
89

Acoronalsection ofhuman brain stemstainedwith theWeigertmethodfor myelin.Large
tracts likethepyramids andthemediallemniscus stain darkly,whereas cellular areas like
theinferior oliveareunstained.
The Golgi method
AdisappointingfeatureofNisslstains is thattheyonlyshow thepresenceofneuronalcell
bodies.However,CamilloGolgibrilliantlysolvedthis problemattheendofthenineteenth
century.Golgidevelopedaremarkablesilver stainthatrevealeddetails ofdendrites andaxons
andcellbodies.Thecells andtheir processes arestainedblackagainstagoldenbackground.
TheGolgistainwas sousefulbecauseitonlystains aboutonepercentoftheneurons inthe
sectionbeingexaminedsothatindividualneurons canbeseeninisolation.Ifallneurons were
stained,theimagewouldbesolidblack.Theuseofthis stainlaunchedarevolutionintheun-
derstandingofbrainanatomypioneeredbytheSpaniardRamonyCajal.
This is athicksection ofthecerebralcortexstained with theGolgimethod.Thestain shows
details of thecellbody,dendrites,andaxon ofalargepyramidalcellin thelower halfofthe
image.
Untilthemiddleofthetwentiethcentury,almostallthatwas learnedaboutbrainstructure
camefromthestudyofGolgi-stainedsections.Thenextphaseofneuroanatomicalresearch
was launchedbyusinghistochemicalstains andmethods fortracingneuronalconnections.
Histochemical staining
Histochemicalstains areusedtomarkspecificcellularcomponents ofneurons orglia,fol-
lowedbyapplyingdyes attractedtothemarkedelements.Manyhistochemicalmethods are
90

aimedatdetectingthepresenceof enzymes,andthesetechniques usuallyworkbestonun-
fixedorlightlyfixed
sections inwhichtheenzymes areundamaged.
Acetylcholinesterase(AChE) staininguses s-acetylthiocholineiodideandethopropazineto
depositabrownproductwherevertheacetylcholinesteraseenzymeis presentandactive.
Sincemany
neurons havereceptors foracetylcholine,this techniquecanbeusedtocharacterize
regions ofstrongcholinergicactivityanddifferentiatebetweendifferentareas inthebrain.
Motorneurons containlargeamounts of acetylcholinesterase,andtheAChEstainis veryef-
fectiveinshowingtheirdistributioninthebrainstemandspinalcord.
ThevalueofAChEstainingcanbeseenintheadjacentAChEsectionofthehippocampus ina
ratbrainsection.Thestainreveals aremarkablelevelofdetailinthelayers andsub-layers of
thehippocampus.
Asection ofratbrain stainedtoshowthepresenceoftheenzymeacetylcholinesterasein the
hippocampus
Avarietyofotherhistochemicalstains havebeendevelopedtodetectthepresenceofother
transmittersubstances,suchas nitricoxide.
Zincandothermetalstains arebasedonmethods thatdepositsilverorfluorescentdyes
aroundions ofzincandotherheavymetals.TheTimm-Danschersilverstainis commonly
usedtoshow thepresenceofzinc.Zincis usedin
DNAregulationandsynapticplasticity,as wellas othercellularsignaling.Thatis whyzinc
stains canshow
long-termactivitypatterns andresponses tochange.
91

This is acoronalsection of ratbrain stainedwith theTimm-Danscher method.Thedark
silver deposits showtheregions thatcontain high concentrations ofzinc.
Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemicalstains useantibodies todetectthepresenceofparticularproteins in
neurons.
Themainchallengeforimmunohistochemistryis ensuringthatantibodies onlybindtothe
proteinof interestandnootherrelatedproteins.Calcium-bindingproteins (suchas calbindin,
calretinin,andparvalbumin)areoftenrestrictedtoparticularcellgroups,andimmunohisto-
chemicalmethods todetecttheseproteins areveryusefulinanatomicalmappingstudies.
This is asection ofthecerebellumofamarmosetmonkeyin which thepresenceofthecal-
cium-bindingprotein calbindin has been revealedbyimmunohistochemicalstaining.In
this section,thePurkinjecellbodies arestainedformingalinebetween thedarkbrown
stainedmolecular layer andthelightbrown stainedgranulecelllayer.
92

Neurofilaments arestructuralproteins presentincertaintypes ofneurons.Themonoclonalan-
tibodySMI-32is widelyusedbecauseitcandemonstratethepresenceofaparticularneurofil-
amentproteinindifferentstructures of thenervous system.NeuN is anantibodyspecificto
theNeuN nuclearproteinexpressedbynearlyallneurons andneveringlialcells.Afew
neurontypes (suchas thecerebellum's Purkinjecells)donotexpress theNeuN proteinand
arethereforeunlabelled.
Atransversesection ofmousespinalcordshowingthepresenceofNeuN antibody.Thecell
bodies anddendrites ofmotor neurons in theventralhorn areclearlystained.In thedorsal
horn,thestain shows thepresenceofmanytinyneurons.Weknowtheseareneurons
rather than gliabecauseglialcells donotcontain theNeuN protein.
Glialproteinmarkers areusedtodistinguishparticularglialcelltypes.GFAP(glialfibrillary
acidicprotein)identifies astrocytes,andother antibodies areusedtomarkproteins specificto
microgliaandoligodendrocytes.
Tracing connections in the nervous system
Untilabout1970,themosteffectivewayof tracingconnections inthenervous systemwas a
silverstainfordegeneratingaxons.Whenaparticular partofthenervous systemis damaged,
thedegeneratingaxons fromthedamagedneurons canbestainedwithasilverstainfirstde-
velopedbyNautaatMITaround1950.This techniquewas themainstayoftracingstudies be-
foreintroducingmoderntracingstudies,suchas thoseusinghorseradishperoxidase(HRP),
thatusenormalaxonaltransportmechanisms.HRPuses retrogradeaxonaltransporttomark
cellbodies afteritis pickedupintoaxonterminals.Still,manynewertracers,suchas cholera
toxinB,useanterogradetransporttoshow theterminaldistributionofparticularaxons.
93

Retrogradetracing.This imageshows agroupof neurons showingthepresenceoftheret-
rogradetracer DiI which hadbeen injectedin theregion oftheaxon terminals ofthese
neurons.Themarker was carriedbyretrogradetransportalongtheaxons toreach their
parentcellbodies
Thevalueoftracingdatadepends ontheaccuratelocalizationofthepointwherethetraceris
delivered.Theexactidentificationofthedesireddeliverypointis generallybasedontheuse
ofastereotaxicatlas.Stereotaxicatlases arethree-dimensionalmaps thatcanbeusedtodefine
thelocationofnucleiandtracts withreferencetotheselandmarks,suchas bregma,thatcan
belocatedduringsurgery.Sometracers canbedetectedintargetareas withinless thanaday,
butothers takeweeks toreachtheir destination.Tracers canbedetectedwithfluorescenceor
withhistochemicaltechniques.
Molecular genetics
Theabilityto targetgenes inmicewas developedinthe1980s byNobelPrizewinners Capec-
chi,Evans,andSmithies.Genetargetingcanknock-outgenes orinsert(knock-in)new genes
intodevelopingcells.Geneknock-ins andknock-outs usetechniques thatcanaddafunction-
inggenetotheorganismordisableageneitalreadyhas sothatits effectontheanimalcanbe
trackedthroughdevelopmentandadulthood.
Asagittalsection ofmousebrain showingtheexpression ofthegenePhox2b.Phox2bis
stronglyexpressedin thefacialnucleus (largeovalareanear theventralmargin).
94

MRI imaging
Amajor breakthroughinthe1990ledtotheuseofmagneticresonance(MRI)forimagingthe
brain.MRIrelies ontheabilitytoexcitespecifictypes ofatoms (usuallyhydrogeninwater
molecules)andtoimagethemsystematically.This allows detailedthree-dimensionalmaps to
beobtained.MRIresolution
depends onthestrengthofthemagneticfieldused.EarlyMRIimagingusedfieldstrengths of
1-3Tesla,
whichyieldedaresolutionof 1-3mm,butnew small-volumeMRIscanners use16Tesla
fields,whichcanresolvestructures inthe20-50µmrange.
An imageofaratbrain obtainedwith a9TeslaMRI scanner.
Questions for repetition
- Whatis stainedduringmyelinstaining?
- Whatstaincanbeusedtostainmyelin?
- Whichneurons areparticularlyrichinAChE?
- Whataxonaltransportmechanismdomanytracers use?
95



