14-1
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Austin Lim, PhD (DePaul University)
Editor: Sandra Virtue, PhD (DePaul University)
A common misconception among non- than the other. We describe these features as
scientists, popularized by the media and online being lateralized. Many different functions have
quizzes, is that analytic people are “left brained” a slight preference in lateralization: for example,
while the creatives among us are “right brained” the right hemisphere seems slightly better at
(Chapter 1). Modern studies have concluded making judgments about the duration of visible
repeatedly that correlating brain function with stimuli or processing of low-frequency musical
behavior on this broad level is not this simple. stimuli. Keep in mind, the left hemisphere can
Both hemispheres of the brain are capable also perform these functions, just not quite as
of carrying out the same essential functions: well as the right can.
processing sensory and perception information, One heavily-lateralized function is
motor communication to the body, and the storage language: for most people, the production and
and retrieval of memory. comprehension of language is dominated by
However, there are some features that structures in the left hemisphere of the brain. This
are slightly more focused in one hemisphere chapter deals with these particular functions.
Chapter 14 outline
14.1 Lateralization
14.2 Language
14.1 Lateralization
Almost all mammals are bilaterally The brain’s two hemispheres are connected
symmetrical, with a left half that is more or less by white matter tracts which allow the two halves
a mirror image of the right half. The internal to communicate. The largest interhemispheric
organs, however, often tell a different story. We white matter tract is the corpus callosum, which
have a single stomach, liver, and heart, none of is made up of 200-250 million axons. If you held a
which are symmetrical. Even paired organs like human brain and separated the two hemispheres
the lungs or kidneys, are slightly asymmetrical. dorsally along the longitudinal fissure, you would
The brain can most accurately be thought of as be able to see the fibers of the corpus callosum
a pair of intimately-connected organs with subtle holding the two halves together. The corpus
differences in function. callosum is about 10 cm (~4 inches) long from
14-2
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

anterior to posterior, and the middle part of the One of their early experiments presented healthy
structure forms the dorsal-most roof of the lateral cats with two different boxes, only one of which
ventricles. contained food. An eyepatch was placed over
In addition to the corpus callosum, there one of the cat’s eyes, and the cat was free to paw
are a handful of other white matter tracts that at one of the boxes, which if chosen correctly,
allow the hemispheres to communicate. The would yield the food reward. At first, as expected,
much-smaller anterior commissure is a tenth of the cat would choose from the boxes at random,
the thickness of the corpus callosum, connects obtaining the food reward 50% of the time. Over
the two temporal lobes, and conveys important multiple trials, as the cat began to learn which box
limbic information such as memory and emotion. held the food, the success rate rose to picking
The hippocampal commissure is one of the the rewarded box 100% of the time. When the
outputs of the hippocampus that connects the eyepatch was then moved to the other eye, the
structures in the left and right hemispheres. cat performed the task correctly 100% of the time,
These small white matter tracts are often used as reliably picking the box associated with food.
points of reference in imaging studies or surgical Then, Myers and Sperry performed a
dissection. two different surgical procedures on the cats.
A pair of researchers, Drs. Ronald Myers One severed the optic chiasm, which kept
and Roger Sperry, were very curious about visual information in the ipsilateral hemisphere.
these pathways of communication between the This ensured that when wearing the eye patch,
two hemispheres. In the 1950’s, they wanted to visual information does not cross into both
understand how information from one visual field hemispheres. The other procedure to severed
gets conveyed into the opposite hemisphere of the their corpus callosum, a process called a
brain. To answer the question of interhemispheric corpus callosotomy (or commissurotomy),
transfer, they conducted experiments in cats. which limited interhemispheric transfer after
visual cortex processing. Between these two
interventions, there were four groups
of cats: Fully intact, optic chiasm
cut, corpus callosum cut, and the
experimental group with both optic
chiasm and corpus callosum cut..
The box-selection behavioral
experiment was then repeated. As with
the intact cats, when the eyepatch was
placed over one eye, the experimental
cats (both chiasm and corpus callosum
severed) initially guessed at the
boxes, getting the reward 50% of the
Figure 14.1 The corpus callosum, indicated in yellow with
time. Again, as before, these animals
red arrow, in a coronal slice (left) and seen from the top
improved their performance over
when both hemispheres are gently pulled apart (right).
repeated trials, eventually getting the
14-3
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Figure 14.2 Myers and Sperry demonstrated that each
hemisphere is capable of learning and storing memories
independently.
14-4
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com
etar
sseccuS
etar
sseccuS
the optic chiasm intact, the visual
information made their way into both
hemispheres through the optic nerve.
Myers and Sperry then
extended their research to humans.
100% 100%
Sometimes, commissurotomy is
suggested for younger patients with
Controls 50% 50%
drug-resistant epilepsy. Grand mal
0% 0%
seizures are often characterized by
Trials
uncontrolled electrical activity in one
100% 100% hemisphere, which then crosses
the corpus callosum to the other
Experimental 50% 50% hemisphere before “bouncing back”
0% 0% to the original hemisphere. During
the procedure, the surgeon cuts the
corpus callosum, and in doing so,
keeps the atypical electrical activity
isolated in one hemisphere. Patients
have significantly fewer and less
reward every time. However, after the eyepatch severe seizures following recovery
was switched from one eye to the other, these from the operation.
cats essentially had to “start over” with their People who have had this surgery
learning: they picked the rewarded box only 50% are sometimes called split-brain patients, a
of the time, improving to 100% over trials. population of patients who were extensively
Because of the surgical procedures, the visual
Clinical connection: Agenesis of the corpus
information and associated reward memory
callosum
in one hemisphere never made it to the other
In a handful of rare cases, people can be
half of the brain - a failure of interhemispheric
born without a corpus callosum, a condition called
transfer.
agenesis of the corpus callosum (ACC). Some
The two other control groups
people with ACC develop atypically, experiencing
immediately performed at 100% after the
seizures and poor motor control or coordination.
eyepatch was switched over, just as well as
An estimated one-fourth of people diagnosed with
the fully intact cats. When the optic chiasm
ACC after birth have some intellectual disability,
was severed with the corpus callosum
but most have typical levels of intelligence. They
intact, the visual information remained in the
may have subtle abnormal developmental traits,
ipsilateral hemisphere, but after processing in
such as a difficulty with processing common
V1, that information passed over the corpus
social cues (as seen in autism). Notably, the real-
callosum to the contralateral hemisphere.
life savant who served as the inspiration for the
When the corpus callosum was severed with
movie Rain Man was born with ACC.

studied by Dr. Michael Gazzaniga.. is then placed in their right hand. As the patient
Overwhelmingly, split-brain patients are healthy feels that object, tactile information such as its
with no significant changes in intelligence and no hardness, diameter, and temperature, ascends
dramatic changes in personality. However, some contralaterally into the left somatosensory cortex
of them do experience deficits in memory and (chapter 8). After the object is removed from their
concentration. hand, the patient is asked to feel blindly through a
Among split-brain patients, very unique collection of objects, all hidden behind the screen,
behavioral and cognitive deficits can be observed and find a matching object. When doing this task
under specific experimental circumstances. with the right hand, they would be successful in
The baseline test begins by briefly showing the selecting an apple (because the motor system
patient some visual stimulus, such as a picture is crossed). However, when the left hand was
of a donut, only in their right visual field, which now tasked with reaching behind the screen
gets represented in the left visual cortex (refer to select a matching object, they would not be
back to chapter 7.2 for a reminder of the circuitry able to know which object to pick up because
of the visual system). When asked what the this information goes to the right somatosensory
patient had seen, they would report “a donut,” cortex (which has no knowledge of the apple).
just as any typical person would (because the left From these data, the researchers concluded that
hemisphere is highly involved in language and each hemisphere is independently capable of
enables the person to report the object verbally). receiving their own sets of somatosensory inputs
In a second experiment, both of the
patient’s hands are placed on a table hidden Left Right
hemisphere hemisphere
behind a screen. An object, such as an apple,
or S
e
M
ot n
s or
y
Figure 14.3 Experimental setup for studying
interhemispheric transfer of visual information
in humans (left). After fixation on the dot in the
Left hand Right hand
center of the visual field, the stimuli (right) are
flashed briefly, and the patient is asked the either Figure 14.4 In split-brain patients, when an apple is
name the item observed, or reach behind the placed in the right hand, that information ascends
screen and select a matching object. contralaterally but cannot cross hemispheres.
14-5
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

and storing their own memories. Without an For most people, who have their corpus
intact corpus callosum, the two hemispheres are callosum intact, information is transferred rapidly
unable to share that knowledge, so the sensory between hemispheres. So, when a spoon is
and memory information that reaches the left shown to our right brain, the left brain learns that
hemisphere isn’t capable of reaching the right information as well, which is why we would be
hemisphere, which controls the left hand - so the able to select a matching object with our right
left hand is clueless to the object placed in the hand.
right hand. Myers and Sperry’s human studies
In the next step of the experiment, a noted an interesting difference in the ability of
different visual stimulus, like a picture of a spoon, split-brain patients to respond verbally. When
is presented to the left visual field, which is the stimulus was sent into the left hemisphere,
initially sent to the right half of the brain. When either a visual stimulus in the right visual field or
asked what they saw, they might say “nothing” an object placed in the right hand, the patients
or “I don’t know.” (because the right hemisphere were able to verbalize what they either saw or
is not specialized for language and the person is felt. But, when the stimulus was represented
not able to report the object verbally). But, when in the right hemisphere, they couldn’t. Their
the patient is asked to reach behind the screen conclusion was that the left hemisphere is much
with their left hand, they could successfully better equipped for language-related functions
select a spoon! (Left hand is controlled by the compared to the right hemisphere. As it turns
right brain, which has knowledge of the spoon.) out, language comprehension and production is
Their right hand, however, couldn’t correctly pick heavily lateralized to the left hemisphere. For his
a matching object (since the left brain does not work regarding the “effects of disconnecting the
have the information about the spoon). Again, cerebral hemispheres”, Dr. Sperry earned the
these results demonstrate that each hemisphere 1981 Nobel Prize.
is capable of receiving their own contralateral
sensory information and storing their own sets of
memory.
14-6
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

14.2 Language
Language is one of Homo sapiens’ greatest inappropriate deviation from these rules can
intellectual evolutionary accomplishments. Using change the meaning of the sentence dramatically.
language, we are able to communicate very Semantics refers to the understanding
complex concepts, such as survival instructions of meaning, especially the meaning of words in
(Don’t eat those berries because they taste relationship to one another in a phrase, sentence,
weird and you’ll get sick) or a shared belief in the or paragraph. Extracting meaning from statements
existence of complex stories (Hang stockings by not meant to be taken literally (such as a hungry
the chimney and you’ll get presents if you were person exclaiming “I’m so hungry, I could eat a
good). Language, when used in these ways, has horse!”) and identification of the meaning of a
a powerful influence on behavior, and modern word under two different contexts (such as in the
humans rely heavily on language in every aspect sentence “I held a nail between my fingers, but
of society. when I swung the hammer, I hit my nail instead.”)
fall under the category of semantics.
Components of language
Speech pathology experts have identified Brain structures involved with language
at least four distinct components for describing Whereas the left and right hemispheres
different aspects of language. The most granular of the brain are mostly symmetrical, one of the
unit is the phoneme, which is an individual sound biggest asymmetries is related to the structures
that generally has no meaning on its own. For responsible for language. Myers and Sperry
example, the word map can be split into three observed that split-brain people can verbally
phonemes, “mm”, the short “/ă/”, and “p” sound. report observations made with the left brain,
The next larger unit of language is the while having difficulty when information is stored
morpheme, which is a combination of phonemes. by their right brain. This suggests that the left
Morphemes are capable of conveying an idea, hemisphere is dominant for language functions.
such as “cat”. Suffixes such as “-s” and “-ing” It is estimated that about 90% of right hand-
also convey ideas (plural and verbs in action, dominant people and about 50% of left hand-
respectively) are also considered morphemes. dominant people use their left hemisphere for
The syntax represents the next higher language related functions.
level of language, which is the information However, this does not mean that the other
conveyed when words are combined in order hemisphere does not contribute to language. The
to produce meaning at the level of phrases and right hemisphere, for example, shows activation
sentences. For example, a statement such as during the use of nonliteral language, such as in
“He gave a gift to his brother” contains syntactic metaphor production or irony comprehension.
information identical to “He gave his brother a In addition to the split-brain patient case
gift”, even though the organization is different. studies, there are several other significant pieces
The grammatical rules of many languages tell of evidence to support left hemispheric dominance
us the order of nouns, verbs, and objects, and for language.
14-7
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

into the internal carotid artery, the drug
gets delivered into just one hemisphere
of the brain with little leakage into the
other. When the anesthesia perfuses
through the left brain, their right hand
loses muscle tone and their fingers will
ACA
stop moving (remember the contralateral
MCA
organization of the motor control system,
PCA
chapter 10.) And, if language is lateralized
in this hemisphere as it is for most people,
Figure 14.5 Areas of the cortex that receive blood
they will also be unable to count during
flow from specific arteries (left). The middle cerebral
this time. Within seconds, the anesthesia
artery (MCA) provides perfusion to frontal, parietal, and
is cleared from the brain, and the wiggling
temporal areas that are important for language. CT scan
and counting resume. If the patient is right
of a patient after a stroke of the MCA, showing loss of
hemisphere dominant for language, then
brain tissue (red arrow, right).
they will be able to count, even though
People with left hemisphere lesions may the fingers stop moving. The procedure is then
lose their language capacities. A stroke of the left repeated while the anesthetic is perfused into the
middle cerebral artery often leads to a variety of other hemisphere.
language related deficits. Unfortunately, similar The Wada test, because of its invasive
injuries sometimes happen after brain surgery, nature and occasional side effects (pain,
traumatic brain injury, or brain infections, also infection, and seizure or stroke in very rare
resulting in language deficits when localized to cases), is used less frequently as functional
the left hemisphere. brain imaging methods have become cheaper
Experimental methods have allowed and more available through the 2000s. The fMRI
researchers to study the lateralization of language is a preferred test of hemispheric dominance.
without causing any permanent damage. The To conduct these tests, a person is put into the
Wada test is the most reliable method by which imaging machine, then asked to perform a series
hemispheric lateralization of language can be of language tests, such as listing several items
determined. Named for the Japanese-born of a given category, or listening to a conversation
neurosurgeon Jun Wada, the test is a presurgical in preparation for follow-up questions. During this
assessment to minimize the risk of a person losing process, the fMRI informs the medical team about
their language capacity in the process of brain which half of the brain shows greater activity
surgery. The protocol begins with the surgical during the language tests. These behavioral tests
team asking the patient to hold up both hands, have been found to be as accurate as the Wada
wiggling their fingers, while counting. The patient test in determining lateralization of language
then receives an intravenous infusion of sodium functions.
amytal, a GABA receptor positive allosteric Across the language dominant
modulator that acts as an anesthetic. When infused hemisphere, there are a few brain regions that
14-8
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Figure 14.6 Non-invasive fMRI scans demonstrate that left hemisphere (negative x) brain areas
increase in blood flow compared to right hemisphere (positive x) during the performance of language
tasks. Warmer colors indicate increases in blood flow, while cooler colors represent decreases.
contribute significantly to language functions.
When something goes wrong with these areas,
a person may develop aphasia, a language
disorder. It is estimated that about 180,000 new
cases of aphasia are diagnosed in the United
States annually. Stroke is a common cause of
aphasia, but other neurological insults such as
head trauma, traumatic brain injury, or subdural
hematoma can induce aphasia. Just like nearly
everything in biology, there is a wide range of
severity, with some cases being very minor and
other cases being much more severe. Speech
therapy can help a patient recover from aphasia,
and this progressive restoration of function is a
demonstration of the brain’s capacity for plasticity
and remodeling.
Expressive (or non-fluent; or Broca’s)
aphasia
One of the first language-related cortical
structures identified is the posterior inferior
frontal gyrus (IFG). Deficits in this area lead to a
difficulty with the production of language.
In the 1860’s, a patient named Louis
Victor Lebourgne had a very unusual condition:
he could only speak one syllable. For Lebourgne,
the syllable “tan” meant everything, from “yes” to
“no” to “hat” to “thirty-four”. Lebourgne would say Figure 14.7 The posterior IFG, or Broca’s
“tan” while gesturing emphatically, scream “TAN area (labeled as 45 and 44; purple and yellow)
TAN!!” when angry, and whisper “tan” when telling contribute to language production.
14-9
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com
roiretnA
secrets. Because of this, the staff at the hospital
called him Patient Tan.
When Patient Tan died, the French
physician Paul Broca performed an autopsy on
the brain. Broca discovered a huge lesion about
the size of a “chicken’s egg” in the left hemisphere,
just dorsal of the lateral fissure in the frontal
lobe. Soon after, Broca performed autopsies on
the brains of seven other patients with similar
language difficulties, all with the same prominent
injury to this portion of their frontal lobe. Because
of the work that Broca did in correlating structure
with function, the posterior IFG came to be called
Broca’s area.

Today, we understand that a localized
injury to the IFG produces a form of aphasia
called expressive aphasia (also called non-
fluent aphasia or Broca’s aphasia). These
patients have difficulty expressing themselves,
only speaking in short, effortful phrases, using
just nouns and verbs while omitting tenses,
conjunctions, and prepositions. They speak
haltingly, sometimes filling the silences in their
sentences with filler phrases. The patients are
profoundly aware of their deficit, leading to Figure 14.8 The superior temporal gyrus, or
overwhelming frustration with their inability to Wernicke’s area (red), contributes to language
communicate. They know what they want to comprehension.
say, but often can’t get it out. Interestingly, these
patients do not have any significant impairment dramatic impairments in comprehension. This
of comprehension. language disorder is receptive aphasia (or
Patients with IFG injury show similar fluent aphasia, or Wernicke’s aphasia.)
expressive deficits regardless of the modality While talking, people with receptive
of their language. For example, when asked to aphasia may create new meaningless words they
write, they write slowly, using mostly nouns and are unaware of, a symptom called paraphasia.
verbs. Alternatively, patients who use American These words could be a mispronunciation of a
Sign Language also lose grammatical syntax and word, perhaps sounding like the jumbling of
communicate slowly when signing! syllables. They can happen at the level of the
phoneme or morpheme, such as in nonwords
Receptive ( or fluent; or Wernicke’s) such as “emchurch” or “plehzd”. They also appear
aphasia at the level of syntax, when a person substitutes
A different brain structure, called the a word incorrectly for another, as in the sentence
superior temporal gyrus is linked to language “But I seem to be table you correctly, sir.”
comprehension. This area is sometimes also Sometimes, they experience a difficulty
called Wernicke’s area, named for the German with recalling words, a symptom called anomia.
physician named Carl Wernicke, who studied a This happens in the middle of a sentence, and
group of patients with a different form of aphasia may be difficult to catch in casual conversation,
than Broca’s. These patients had no deficits in since they will often use vague language (“stuff”
the production of speech, but the words they or “things”) or use several words in a roundabout
used were very disorganized. They could speak fashion to describe what they are trying to say, a
complete sentences fluently, but their speech behavior called circumlocution (“red, it’s green,
contained almost no substantial semantic content. and yellow means be cautious, to keep people
Unlike Broca’s patients, Wernicke’s patients had safe” instead of “traffic light.”)
14-10
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Conduction aphasia deficits, usually only being able to communicate
Early theories suggested that using only single words or grunts. They also
communication between the STG and the IFG struggle with repeating words spoken to them.
is important for healthy language production and Following a major stroke to the left middle cerebral
comprehension. Anatomically, a band of white artery, global aphasia may first present, possibly
matter called the arcuate fasciculus spans lessening in severity as the brain heals.
these areas, originating in STG and terminating If their other hemisphere is spared, patients
in the IFG. When this structure is injured, people with global aphasia can learn to communicate
develop some difficulty with repeating language using pantomime or facial expressions.
they hear, a disorder called conduction aphasia.
Generally, these patients display paraphasias The Wernicke-Geschwind model
when asked to repeat multisyllabic words, often From case studies of injuries leading to
switching phonemes around in a single word. aphasia, a few cortical structures emerge as being
These patients have no significant deficits major contributors to language: the IFG, STG, and
in language production or comprehension, the arcuate fasciculus that connects the two. Two
presumably because their IFG and STG are still neurologists, Carl Wernicke and later Norman
intact and healthy. Conduction aphasia is less Geschwind, proposed the Wernicke-Geschwind
severe than expressive or receptive aphasia. model, which suggests that information is passed
along through language structures in a linear
pathway, and each section is responsible for a
different aspect of language.
The model begins with the simple scenario:
An interviewer is asking you a question, and you
answer. First, the sound information arrives into
A1, the primary auditor y cortex (see chapter 8
for more details). From there, that information
is processed by the STG (Wernicke’s area),
which then takes meaning out of those sounds.
Then, that information travels across the arcuate
fasciculus. Then, that information arrives at
the IFG (Broca’s area), where neurons carry
Figure 14.9 The arcuate fasciculus (colored) is
information related to the planning of language,
a large white matter band that connects the two
such as coordinating the muscle movements
major language-related cortical structures.
that create the verbal response. Finally, those
signals arrive at the motor cortex, which is then
Global aphasia responsible for sending the descending signals to
Extensive brain damage to the left IFG, control the muscles required for speech (chapter
STG, and arcuate fasciculus may cause the most 10).
severe form of aphasia, global aphasia. Patients Another component of the model proposes
experience both expressive and receptive an explanation for the following situation: You read
14-11
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

M1 M1
Arcuate Arcuate
fasciculus fasciculus
IFG STG IFG V1
Angular gyrus
A1 STG
Figure 14.10 The Wernicke-Geschwind model in auditory processing and responding suggests that
information signaling arrives into cortex through A1, travels through STG, IFG, then M1 (left). In a
reading and responding task, the model suggests that information signaling arrives into cortex through
V1, passes through circuits in the angular gyrus, then through STG, IFG, then M1 (right).
a question on a piece of paper, and answer the
question verbally. Visual information arrives into Clinical connection: Dyslexia
the V1, the primary visual cortex. The output of Affecting an estimated 7-20% of the
the visual cortices arrives at the angular gyrus, population, developmental dyslexia is a
a parietal lobe structure just posterior to the pronounced difficulty with identification of
STG. From here, the signal travels through phonemes in printed words and a related difficulty
STG and continues through motor cortex, with reading unfamiliar words. Challenges appear
following the same pathway described above. in preschool, when learning to decode phonemes
This Wernicke-Geschwind model was is an expected developmental milestone. These
initially helpful for providing a framework for difficulties are not a result of intellectual disability.
understanding language. But in modern times, However, dyslexia is not explicitly a language
we regard it as an oversimplified and outdated disorder, since patients generally have no
explanation of a complex behavior. Sometimes difficulties with comprehension of spoken word.
the model fails to accurately predict the nature Genetic factors contribute to risk, but a
of a patient’s aphasia even if the locus of a lesion definitive neural mechanism behind dyslexia is still
has been precisely identified. Furthermore, unknown. There are differences in the anatomy
some injuries to brain areas outside of those and activity of the cerebellum and some atypical
structures identified in the model produce lateralization in temporal, parietal, and occipital
aphasia. lobes, suggesting that perhaps some atypical
Modern research indicates that language communication from V1 to the language areas of
functions are not strictly localized as described the brain or memory of previously-learned words
by the Wernicke-Geschwind model. Instead, contribute to symptoms.
language is such a complex behavior, that the
interactions between these areas and more are
used in language.
14-12
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Cover art: https://pixabay.com/photos/call-calling-cell-cellphone-15828/
14.1 https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/df/Gray_718-emphasizing-corpus-callosum.png modified by Austin
Lim
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/3/3b/Gray_733-emphasizing-corpus-callosum.png
14.2 https://pixabay.com/vectors/baby-cat-face-cute-pet-smile-47809/ modified by Austin Lim
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Pirate_patch.jpg modified by Austin Lim
14.3 https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/3/3b/SplitBrainExperiments.jpg modified by Austin Lim
https://pixabay.com/vectors/bud-donuts-the-cake-cakes-2013344/
https://pixabay.com/vectors/spoon-dishes-food-breakfast-1300507/
14.4 https://pixabay.com/vectors/hand-counting-fingers-one-two-162127/ modified by Austin Lim
https://pixabay.com/vectors/brain-human-anatomy-head-1531009/
https://pixabay.com/illustrations/apple-fruit-red-ripe-fresh-5967971/
14.5 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Cerebral_vascular_territories.jpg modified by Austin Lim
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/11/1-s2.0-S0967586810002766-gr2.jpg
14.6 Wegrzyn M, Mertens M, Bien CG, Woermann FG and Labudda K (2019) Quantifying the Confidence in fMRI-Based
Language Lateralisation Through Laterality Index Deconstruction. Front. Neurol. 10:655. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2019.00655
14.7 https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/c/ca/Broca%E2%80%99s_area_-_BA44_and_BA45.png
14.8 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Areawerinicke.jpg
14.9 https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/2a/Arcuate_Fasciculus.jpg
14.10 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:1605_Brocas_and_Wernickes_Areas-02.jpg modified by Austin Lim
The Open Neuroscience Initiative is funded by a grant from the Vincentian Endowment Fund of
DePaul University.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International License.
14-13
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com



1/7/25, 10:09 AM Learning and Memory (Section 4, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 4: Homeostasis and Higher Brain Functions
Search
Chapter 7: Learning and Memory
John H. Byrne, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
Reviewed and revised 20 Oct 2020
The analysis of the anatomical and physical bases of
LLeeaarrnniinngg aanndd MMeemmoorryy
learning and memory is one of the great successes of
modern neuroscience. Thirty years ago little was known
about how memory works, but now we know a great deal.
This Chapter will discuss four issues that are central to
learning and memory. First, what are the different types of
memory? Second, where in the brain is memory located?
One possibility is that human memory is similar to the
memory chip in a personal computer (PC), which stores all
the memory in one location. A second possibility is that our
memories are distributed and stored in different regions of
the brain. Third, how does memory work? What types of
changes occur in the nervous system when a memory is
formed and stored, are there particular genes and proteins
that are involved in memory, and how can a memory last for
a lifetime? Fourth, is the issue of importance to many Video of lecture
people, especially as we age: How can memory be
maintained and improved, and how can it be fixed when it is
broken?
7.1 Types of Memory
Psychologists and neuroscientists have divided memory systems into two broad categories, declarative and nondeclarative (Figure
7.1). The declarative memory system is the system of memory that is perhaps the most familiar. It is the memory system that
has a conscious component and it includes the memories of facts and events. A fact like 'Paris is the capital of France', or an event
like a prior vacation to Paris. Nondeclarative memory, also called implicit memory, includes the types of memory systems that do
not have a conscious component but are nevertheless extremely important. They include the memories for skills and habits (e.g.,
riding a bicycle, driving a car, playing golf or tennis or a piano), a phenomenon called priming, simple forms of associative learning
[e.g., classical conditioning (Pavlovian conditioning)], and finally simple forms of nonassociative learning such as habituation and
sensitization. Sensitization will be discussed in detail later in the Chapter. Declarative memory is "knowing what" and
nondeclarative memory is "knowing how".
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter07.html 1/15

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Learning and Memory (Section 4, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
Figure 7.1
Memory systems in the brain. (Modified from Squire and Knowlton, 1994)
7.2 Testing Memory
Figure 7.2
Word recognition memory test.
Figure 7.3
Object recognition memory test.
Everyone is interested in knowing how well they remember so let us take a simple memory test. The test (Figure 7.2) will present
a list of 15 words, then there will be a pause and you will be asked whether you remember some of those words. Sorry, you have
to put your pen down for this test and do not read further in the Chapter until you complete the test.
This memory test called the DRM test after its creators James Deese, Henry Roediger and Kathleen McDermott. It was not meant
to be a trick, but to illustrate a very interesting and important feature about memory. We like to think that memory is similar to
taking a photograph and placing that photograph into a filing cabinet drawer to be withdrawn later (recalled) as the “memory”
exactly the way it was placed there originally (stored). But memory is more like taking a picture and tearing it up into small pieces
and putting the pieces in different drawers. The memory is then recalled by reconstructing the memory from the individual
fragments of the memory. The reason so many individuals incorrectly believe that “sweet” was on the list is because there were so
many other words on the list that had a sweet connotation. “Failing” this test is actually not a bad outcome. Individuals with
Alzheimer’s disease generally do not say that “sweet” was on the list. They cannot make the normal associations involved in the
recall of a memory.
The word list gives insights into memory processing and retrieval, but it is not a really good test of “raw” memory ability because it
can be affected by distortions and biases. To avoid these problems, psychologists have developed other memory tests. One is the
object recognition test (Figure 7.3) to test declarative memory. This test is also good because, as we will see later, it can even be
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter07.html 2/15

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Learning and Memory (Section 4, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
used on animals. The test involves presenting a subject with two different objects and they are asked to remember those objects.
There is a pause and then two objects are shown again, one of which is new and the other having been shown previously. Subjects
are asked to identify the novel object, and to do so, they need to remember which one was shown previously. A somewhat related
test is the object location test in which subjects are asked to remember the location of an object on a two-dimensional surface.
Examples of nondeclarative memory, such as associative learning, can be tested by pairing one stimulus with another and later
testing whether a subject has learned to make the association between the two stimuli. The classical example is the paradigm
developed by the Russian physiologist Ivan Pavlov, which is now called classical or Pavlovian conditioning. In classical conditioning
(Figure 7.4), a novel or weak stimulus (conditioned stimulus, CS) like a sound is paired with a stimulus like food that generally
elicits a reflexive response (unconditioned response, UR; unconditioned stimulus, US) such as salivation. After sufficient training
with contingent CS-US presentations (which may be a single trial), the CS is capable of eliciting a response (conditioned response,
CR), which often resembles the UR (or some aspect of it).
PLAY
PAUSE
CS
US
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 7.4
Classical (Pavlovian) conditioning.
7.3 Localization of Memory
Now let us turn to this issue about where is memory located. There are three basic approaches.
1. Imaging. Modern imaging techniques like fMRI (functional magnetic resonance imaging) or PET (positron emission
tomography) allows one to “see” areas of the brain that are active during specific brain tasks. If a subject is placed in an fMRI
scanner and given a memory test, one can determine what areas of the brain are active, and that activity presumably is
related to where in the brain the memory is processed and/or stored.
Figure 7.5
PET brain scan during an object location test. (from A. M. Owen, et al., J. Cog. Neurosci. 8:6, 588-602,
1996.)
Figure 7.5 illustrates an example of a PET scan of an individual who is performing an object location test. The color code
is such that the brighter, redder regions indicate increased brain activity. The most active region is the hippocampus. In
discussions of memory, the hippocampus is mentioned repeatedly because it is a major part of the brain involved in
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter07.html 3/15

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Learning and Memory (Section 4, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
declarative memory function. This illustration clearly indicates that the hippocampus is involved in object location
memory. But as we will see soon, it is not where all memories are stored.
2. Brain lesions. In this experimental procedure, small parts of the brains of mice or rats are surgically removed or chemically
inactivated and the animals are systematically examined to determine whether the lesion affected any memory system.
3. Brain disease and injury. Here scientists take advantage of individuals who have had unfortunate brain injuries, for example,
through stroke or through a brain tumor in a specific area of the brain. If one finds a memory deficit in the patient, it is likely
that the region of the brain that was injured is involved in that memory.
A classic study on localization of memory was the result of surgery performed on Henry Molaison, a patient who was only known to
the scientific community as “H.M.” until his death in 2008. H. M. is famous in neuroscience literature because his brain provided
major insights into the localization of memory function. In the 1950’s, H.M. was diagnosed with intractable epilepsy, and while
there are pharmacologic treatments, in some cases the only treatment is to remove the portion of the brain that is causing the
seizures. Consequently, H.M.'s hippocampus was removed bilaterally. Figure 7.6 (right) is an MRI of a normal individual showing
the hippocampal region, whereas Figure 7.6 (left) shows a MRI of patient H.M. after the removal of the hippocampus.
Figure 7.6
Bran scans of H.M. (left), and a normal individual (right). (Copyright © 1997 by Suzanne Corkin, used with permission of The Wylie Agency
LLC.)
Before the operation, H.M. had a fine memory, but after the operation, H.M. had a very severe memory deficit. Specifically, after
the operation H.M.'s ability to form any new memories for facts and events was severely impaired; he had great difficulty learning
any new vocabulary words; he could not remember what happened the day before. So if H.M. had an interview the day following a
previous interview, he would have little or no memory about the interview or events during it. This study clearly indicated that the
hippocampus was critical for memory formation. But whereas H.M. had great difficulty forming new memories for facts and events,
he still had all of his old memories for facts and events. Specifically, he had all his childhood memories, and all of his memories
prior to the operation. This type of memory deficit is called anterograde amnesia. (In contrast, retrograde amnesia refers to
loss of old memories.) The studies on H.M. clearly indicated that whereas the hippocampus is critical for the formation of new
memories, it is not where the old memories are stored. It is now known that those old memories are stored in other parts of the
brain, such as in the frontal cortex. The process by which an initially labile memory is transformed into a more enduring form is
called consolidation. This process involves the memory being stored in a different part of the brain than the initial site of its
encoding.
H.M. was also interesting in that while his ability to form new memories for facts and events was severely impaired, he could form
new memories for skills and habits. While he could form new memories for skills and habits, he did not know that he had the
skills! He had no awareness of the memory; he couldn’t declare that he had it. This finding clearly indicated that the memory for
skills and habits are not formed in the hippocampus. Collectively, we learned from these studies on H.M. and other patients that
memory is distributed throughout the nervous system, and different brain regions are involved in mediating different types of
memory.
Figure 7.7 summarizes many decades of research on the anatomical locus of memory systems. The medial temporal lobe and
structures like the hippocampus are involved with memories for facts and events; the striatum is involved with memories for skills
and habits; the neocortex is involved with priming; the amygdala is involved with emotional memories; and the cerebellum with
simple forms of associative learning. Lower brain regions and the spinal cord contain even simpler forms of learning. In summary,
memory is not stored in a single place in the brain. It is distributed in different parts of the brain.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter07.html 4/15

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Learning and Memory (Section 4, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
Figure 7.7
Memory systems and their anatomical loci. (Modified from Squire and Knowlton, 1994)
7.4 Mechanisms of Memory
Model systems to study memory mechanisms
Figure 7.8
Aplysia californica and its nerve cells.
Much of what has been learned about the neural and molecular mechanisms of learning and memory have come from the use of so
called “model systems” that are amenable to cellular analyses. One of those model systems is illustrated in Figure 7.8A. Aplysia
californica is found in the tidal pools along the coast of Southern California. It is about six inches long and weighs about 150
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter07.html 5/15

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Learning and Memory (Section 4, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
grams. At first glance it is an unpromising looking creature, but neuroscientists have exploited the technical advantages of this
animal to gain fundamental insights into the molecular mechanisms of memory. Indeed, the pioneering discoveries of Eric Kandel
using this animal were recognized by his receipt of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 2000. Aplysia have three technical
advantages.
First, it exhibits simple forms of nondeclarative (implicit) learning like classical (Pavlovian) conditioning, operant conditioning and
sensitization.
Second, Aplysia have a very simple nervous system. Compared to the 100’s of billions of nerve cells in the human brain, the entire
nervous system of this animal only has about 10,000 cells. Those cells are distributed in different ganglia like the one illustrated in
Figure 7.8B. Each ganglia like this one has only about 2,000 cells, yet it is capable of mediating or controlling a number of
different behaviors. This means that any one behavior can be controlled by 100 neurons or even less. One has the potential of
working out the complete neural circuit underlying a behavior, and then, after training the animal, the neural circuit can be
examined to identify what has changed in the circuit that underlies the memory.
Third, the ganglia contain neurons that are very large. Figure 7.8B shows a ganglion under a dissecting microscope. It is about
2mm in diameter. The spherical structures throughout the ganglia are the cell bodies of individual neurons. Each neuron is
identifiable and has a unique localization and function. A related advantage is that individual neurons can be removed and placed in
culture medium where they can survive for many days. Indeed, multiple neurons can be removed from the ganglia and they
reestablish their normal synaptic connections, thereby providing a very powerful experimental system to study the physiology of
nerve cells and the properties of the connections between them. Figure 7.8C shows an example of a sensory neuron (small cell to
the right) and a motor neuron (large cell to the left) in culture. In the micrograph it is possible to see the shadow of a
microelectrode that has impaled the sensory neuron, and the shadow of a microelectrode that has impaled a motor neuron for
performing intracellular recordings.
Sensitization, a simple form of nondeclarative learning amenable to detailed cellular analyses
Figure 7.9
Drawing of Aplysia (A) and data graph (B) of sensitization.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter07.html 6/15

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Learning and Memory (Section 4, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
A. B. C.
PLAY PLAY PLAY
Control Animal Sensitization Training Sensitized Animal
Sensitizing
stimuli
gill gill gill
siphon siphon siphon
tail tail tail
Test stimulus Test stimulus
c 2000 UTHSCH c 2000 UTHSCH c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 7.10
Reflex responses of a control animal (A), an animal that received sensitization training (B), and a sensitized animal (C).
Figures 7.9 and 7.10 illustrate a simple behavior exhibited by the animal and a simple form of learning called sensitization. The
animal is tested by stimulating its tail with a weak electric shock (7.9) or a weak mechanical tap (7.10). These stimuli elicit
defensive reflex withdrawals of the body, which includes the tail and nearby sites such as the gill and a fleshy spout called the
siphon. In response to test stimuli delivered every five minutes, the withdrawals are fairly reliable. They are about the same
duration each time (Figures 7.9B, C, 7.10A). But if a strong noxious stimulus (e.g., an electric shock) is delivered to another part
of the animal such as its body wall, subsequent test stimuli to the tail give enhanced responses (Figure 7.9B and 7.10B). This is an
example of a simple form of learning called sensitization. It is defined as the enhancement of the response to a test stimulus as a
result of delivering a strong generally noxious stimulus to the animal. In a sense, the animal is learning that it is in a “fearful”
environment. Sensitization is a ubiquitous form of learning that is exhibited by all animals including humans.
Neural circuit and mechanisms of sensitization
1. Neural circuit. We can take advantage of the large nerve cells of Aplysia, and the ability to make intracellular recordings from
them, to work out the underlying neural circuit. Figure 7.11 illustrates a simplified view of the key components of the
underlying neural circuit. Stimulation of the skin activates sensory neurons (SN) (only one of which is illustrated here) which
make glutamatergic excitatory synaptic connections (triangles) with motor neurons (MN). If the summated synaptic input to
the motor neurons is sufficiently large, the motor neurons will be activated and action potentials will propagate out of the
ganglion to cause an eventual contraction of the muscle. So stimulation of the skin excites sensory neurons, the sensory
neurons activate motor neurons, and motor neurons contract the muscles. Also, it should be evident that the greater the
activation of the motor neurons, the greater will be the subsequent reflex response. This reflex in Aplysia is similar to the
knee jerk or stretch reflex mediated by similar circuitry in the vertebrate spinal cord.
PLAY c 2000 UTHSCH
Sensitizing
stimuli Muscle
(reflex response)
Test
stimulus IN
(5-HT)
SN MN
Skin
(sensory input)
Figure 7.11
Neural circuit for the defensive withdrawal reflex.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter07.html 7/15

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Learning and Memory (Section 4, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
2. Mechanisms of sensitization. Sensitizing stimuli lead to the release of the neurotransmitter serotonin (5-HT) (represented by
cell labeled IN and colored in purple on Figure 7.11). 5-HT modulates the strength of the connection between the sensory
neuron and the motor neuron. An action potential in the sensory neuron before the learning produces a small excitatory
postsynaptic potential (EPSP) in the motor neuron (Figure 7.12A). But, after delivering the sensitizing stimulus, an action
potential in the sensory neuron leads to a larger synaptic potential in the motor neuron (Figure 7.12C). A larger synaptic
potential in the motor neuron increases the probability that the motor neuron will be activated to a greater extent and
produce a larger contraction of the muscle (i.e., sensitization).
One principle about learning and memory derived from studies of this simple animal, and this principle holds true in our
brains as well, is that learning involves changes in the strength of synaptic connections between neurons. Learning is
not due to a reorganization of the nervous system or the growth of new neurons. What has changed is that the strength
of a previously existing connection is modified.
Now we can take this analysis one step further and ask what are the biochemical mechanisms that underlie learning and
memory. We will divide the discussion into two temporal domains of memory; short-term memory and long-term
memory. We have already discussed different types of memory such as declarative and nondeclarative memory. There
are also different temporal domains of memory. Short-term memories are like the memory for a telephone number that
last several minutes, and long-term memory are memories that last days, weeks or a lifetime.
Figure 7.12A
Before sensitization. Slide the blue ball to control the animation.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter07.html 8/15

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Learning and Memory (Section 4, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
Figure 7.12B
During sensitization. Slide the blue ball to control the animation.
Figure 7.12C
After sensitization. Control the animation by sliding the blue ball.
a. Mechanisms of short-term sensitization. The mechanisms for the short-term memory for sensitization are illustrated in Figure
7.12B. The sensitizing stimulus leads to release of the neurotransmitter 5-HT. 5-HT binds the two types of receptors on the
sensory neuron; one is coupled to the DAG/PKC system, and the other is coupled to the cyclic AMP/PKA system. These are
the same general cascades that you learned in biochemistry. Learning mechanisms have evolved to co-opt some of the
biochemical machinery that are already present in all cells used them specifically for a memory mechanism in nerve cells.
The protein kinases exert two types of actions. First, they regulate the properties of different membrane channels (the small
gates on the illustration (Figure 7.12) represent membrane channels that underlie the initiation and the repolarization of the
action potential). Consequently after a sensitizing stimulus, the amount of calcium that enters the synaptic terminal during
an action potential and causes the release of transmitter will be enhanced. In addition, the modulation of the membrane
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter07.html 9/15

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Learning and Memory (Section 4, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
channels leads to an increase in the excitability of the sensory neuron and as a result a greater number of action potentials
will be elicited by a test stimulus to the skin. Second, the kinases regulate other cellular processes involved in transmitter
release, such as the size of the pool of synaptic vesicles available for release in response to the influx of Ca2+ with each action
potential. Finally, 5-HT leads to changes in the properties of the postsynaptic motor neuron. Specifically, 5-HT leads to an
increase in the number of glutamate receptors. The consequences of these processes can be seen by comparing the strength
of the synaptic connection produced by a single action potential before (Figure 7.12A) and after (Figure 7.12C) sensitization.
The specific details of all the currents and processes are not critical. However, it is important to know the general principles.
One principle is that learning involves the engagement of second messenger systems. Here both the protein kinase C (PKC)
and the protein kinase A (PKA) systems are involved. This is a fairly general principle. In every example of learning that has
ever been examined, whether vertebrate or invertebrate, second messenger systems are engaged. A second principle is that
memory involves the modulation of neuronal membrane channels. These can include channels that directly regulate
transmitter release (i.e., Ca2+ channels in the presynaptic neuron), channels that regulate neuronal excitability, and channels
that mediate synaptic responses in the postsynaptic neuron. A third principle is that cyclic AMP is one of the critical second
messengers that is involved in memory. Given this information, you can begin to think about how memory could be improved
based on your knowledge of the underlying biochemistry.
We have discussed a mechanism for a short-term memory. It is "short-term" because the memory is transient and that
is so because the underlying biochemical changes are transient. The duration of the memory is dependent on how long
the various substrate proteins (e.g., membrane channels) are phosphorylated. PKA will only be activated for a short
time after a brief stimulus because cyclic AMP will be degraded and PKA levels will decrease. Protein phosphatases will
remove the phosphate groups on the substrate proteins that are “storing” the memory.
Figure 7.13
Structural changes in sensory neurons associated with long-term
sensitization. (Modified from M. Wainwright et al., J. Neurosci.
22:4132-4141, 2002.)
b. Mechanisms of long-term sensitization. There are two major differences between short-term and long-term
memories. Long-term memories involve changes in protein synthesis and gene regulation, whereas short-term
memories do not. And, long-term memories in many cases involve structural modifications. Figure 7.13 illustrates
examples of the processes of two sensory neurons that have been filled with a dye, one from an untrained animal
and one from a trained animal. Shown are the thick axonal process of the neuron and many fine branches. Along
the branches are seen small dot-like swellings or varicosities. These varicosities are the presynaptic terminals of
the sensory neurons that make contact with other neurons like the motor neurons. (The motor neurons cannot be
seen because only the sensory neurons were filled with the dye.) Part B of Figure 7.13 shows an example of a
sensory neuron that has been injected with a dye in an untrained animal, and Part A shows one that has been
filled with a dye 24 h after sensitization training. There is a major difference between these two neurons. The
neuron from the trained animal has a greater number of branches and a greater number of synaptic varicosities
than the neuron from the untrained animal. Therefore, long-term memory involves changes in the structure of
neurons including growth of new processes and synapses. So, to the extent that you remember anything about
this material on memory tomorrow, or next week, or next year, it will be because structural changes in synapses
are beginning in your brains!
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter07.html 10/15

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Learning and Memory (Section 4, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 7.14
Genes implicated in long-term sensitization.
Given that long term memory involves changes in gene expression, a major goal of neuroscientists is to
identify the specific genes and proteins that are involved in long-term memory. Figure 7.14 illustrates some
of the genes and the proteins that are involved in long-term sensitization. Note that cAMP, one of the second
messengers involved in the short-term memory, is also involved in the induction of long-term memory. But
now, in addition to its effects on the phosphorylation of membrane channels, cAMP, through PKA,
phosphorylates transcription factors such as CREB (cAMP responsive element binding protein). Transcription
factors like CREB, when phosphorylated, are capable of regulating gene expression, which leads to changes
in the expression of proteins that are important for inducing and maintaining the long-term changes in
synaptic strength and therefore the long term memory.
Note that there is not a single “magic memory gene” – rather, the induction and maintenance of memory,
even in a single neuron, involves the engagement of multiple genes and proteins that act synergistically to
change the properties of the neurons and regulate the properties of the neuron and the strength of the
synapse. Also note that changes in gene expression do not occur all at once – there are different phases.
Some changes in gene expression occur early, some even 24 hours after the learning occurs.
Long-term potentiation (LTP): A likely synaptic mechanism for declarative memory
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter07.html 11/15

An enduring form of synaptic plasticity called long-term potentiation (LTP) is believed to be involved in many examples
of declarative memory. It is present in the hippocampus, which is known to be involved in declarative memories. LTP
can be studied in brain slice preparations where an electric shock (test stimulus) can be delivered to afferent fibers and
the resultant summated EPSP can be recorded in the postsynaptic neuron (Figure 7.15A). If the pathway is repeatedly
stimulated (e.g., every minute), the amplitude of EPSP is constant (Figure 7.15B).
Delivering a brief 1-sec duration train of high frequency (100 Hz) stimuli (i.e., the tetanus) to the afferent nerve
produces two types of enhancement in the postsynaptic neuron. First, there is a transient facilitation called post-tetanic
potentiation (PTP) that dies away after several minutes. Second, following the PTP is a very enduring enhancement of
the EPSP called LTP. LTP is the kind of mechanism necessary to store a long-term memory (Figure 7.15B).
Na+ Na+ Mg2+ Na+ Na+ Ca2 N+ a+ Na+ Ca2+ Na+
Ca2+ Na+ Mg2+ CM a2g +2+
K+
K+ K+ K+ K+ K+ K+
K+ K+ K+ PLAY
APMA APMA ADMN
NNaa++
CCNN aaaa 22++ ++Mg2NN +aa++ Ca N2 a+ + Mg2CNN +aaa++ 2+ Na+ CCaa22++
NNaa++
K+
KK++ K+ KK++ K+
KK++ KK++ KK++ PLAY
APMA ADMN
Na+
CCNN aaaa 22++ ++ MgNN 2+aa++ C Na a2 ++ Mg2C +NN aaa 2++ + Na+ CCaa22++
NNaa++
K+
KK++ K+ KK++ K+
KK++ KK++ KK++ PPLLAAYY
APMA ADMN
1/7/25, 10:09 AM Learning and Memory (Section 4, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
c 2000 UTHSCH
A. Before tetanus B. During tetanus C. After tetanus
+
Membrane
potential
_
Figure 7.16
Animation of the induction and expression of LTP.
The NMDA-type glutamate receptor is critical for some forms of LTP, in particular LTP at the CA3-CA1 synapse in
the hippocampus. The postsynaptic spines of CA1 neurons have two types of glutamate receptors; NMDA-type
glutamate receptors and AMPA-type glutamate receptors (Figures 7.16A). Both receptors are permeable to Na+ and K+,
but the NMDA-type has two additional features. First, in addition to being permeable to Na+, it also has a significant
permeability to Ca2+. Second, this channel is normally blocked by Mg2+.
Even if glutamate binds to the NMDA receptor and produces a conformational change, there is no efflux of K+ or influx
of Na+ and Ca2+ because the channel is "plugged up" or blocked by the Mg2+. Thus, a weak test stimulus will not open
this channel because it is blocked by Mg2+. A weak test stimulus will produce an EPSP, but that EPSP will be mediated
by the AMPA receptor. It is as if the NMDA receptor were not even there.
Now consider the consequences of delivering a tetanus (Figure 7.16B). During the tetanus, there will be spatial and
temporal summation of the EPSPs produced by the multiple afferent synapses on the common postsynaptic cell (Figure
7.15A). Consequently, the membrane potential of the postsynaptic neuron will be depolarized significantly, much more
so than the depolarization produced by a single afferent test stimulus. Because the inside of the cell becomes positive
with the large synaptic input, the positively charged Mg2+ is repelled by the inside positivity and is "thrust" out of the
channel. Now the channel is unplugged and Ca2+ can enter the spine through the unblocked NMDA receptor. The Ca2+
that enters the cell activates various protein kinases, which then trigger long-term changes. One component of the long-
term change is the insertion of new AMPA receptors into the postsynaptic membrane (Figure 7.16C). Therefore, after
the tetanus, the transmitter released from the presynaptic neuron by a test stimulus will bind to a greater number of
receptors on the postsynaptic neuron. If more receptors are bound and hence opened, a larger (potentiated) EPSP (i.e.,
LTP) will be produced (Figure 7.16C). In addition to an increase in the number of postsynaptic AMPA receptors, there is
evidence that a greater amount of transmitter is released from the presynaptic neurons. The combination of the
presynaptic and postsynaptic effects would act synergistically to increase the size of the synaptic potential in the
postsynaptic neuron. Note that this example of a synaptic mechanism for declarative memory bears some similarity to
the synaptic mechanism for the example of nondeclarative memory (sensitization) discussed previously. Although the
specific details differ, both involve activation of second messenger systems and regulation of membrane channels.
Therefore, at a fundamental mechanistic level, there does not appear to be significant differences between the two
major classes of memory systems. The major difference appears to be the brain region and the neural circuit and into
which the learning mechanism is embedded.
7.5 Enhancing Memory
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter07.html 12/15

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Learning and Memory (Section 4, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
Figure 7.17
A data plot of enhanced memory in transgenic mice.
With a knowledge of some of the genes and proteins involved in memory, we can use this information to try to both test
the role of specific proteins in memory and also to improve memory. One experimental way of approaching the issue is
to use transgenic technology in which a gene of interest can be over expressed in an animal by introducing it into an egg
cell. When the offspring develop into adults, their performance on memory tests can be examined. An example of this
approach is illustrated in Figure 7.17. Here the role of the NMDA receptor was examined by Joe Tsien and his
colleagues, who were then at Princeton University. If NMDA receptors are important for the induction of LTP, and LTP is
important for declarative memory, one would expect that animals that had a greater number of NMDA receptors would
learn more readily. NMDA receptors were over expressed in mice and the mice were tested on the object discrimination
test that was discussed earlier in the Chapter.
To assess the performance of a mouse on the object recognition task, the experimenter measures the amount of time
for some predefined period the mouse spends exploring the one object, versus the amount of time the mouse spends
exploring the other object. If the mouse remembers that it had seen one of the objects previously, it will spend more
time exploring the novel one. As illustrated in Figure 7.17, one hour after the initial presentation of the objects, the
mice do very well on the test. Indeed, they are correct about 100% of the time. They know the novel object. However,
one day later the memory performance is rather poor, and after three days it is even worse. By one week, mice show
no recognition memory.
What about the mice that received the extra NMDA receptors? Now one day after training they have perfect memory!
So the extra receptors have led to an improved memory performance. That’s the good news – but the bad news is that
the memory is no better one week later. This somewhat disappointing finding should not be surprising. Although NMDA
receptors are important in memory, they are not the whole story. As indicated earlier in the Chapter, memory involves
the synergistic engagement of multiple genes and proteins. So to improve memory further, it will be necessary to
manipulate multiple genes. At the present time it is difficult to do so, but, it probably will become possible in the near
future. It will also be possible to over express genes of interest in targeted areas of the human brain. The future for
treating individuals with memory disabilities looks very promising.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter07.html 13/15

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Learning and Memory (Section 4, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
SSyynnaappttiicc PPllaassttiicciittyy
This animation by Graduate students Julia Hill and Natalia Rozas De
O'Laughlin of the Neuroscience Graduate Program at McGovern Medical
School at UTHealth explains the concept of synaptic plasticity. It placed
third in the 2011 Inaugural Society for Neuroscience Brain Awareness
Video Contest.
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
A 50-year old patient with recent damage to the hippocampus from a stroke would likely have all of
the following deficits EXCEPT:
A. Difficulty learning new facts
B. Difficulty describing a recent event
C. Difficulty learning a new vocabulary word
D. Difficulty recalling a childhood memory
E. Difficulty remembering a face
Question 2 A B C D
Short term memories can involve all of the following processes EXCEPT:
A. Regulation of gene expression
B. Activation of second-messenger systems
C. Modulation of membrane channels
D. Modulation of transmitter release
Question 3 A B C D E
Classical conditioning is an example of:
A. Semantic memory
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter07.html 14/15

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Learning and Memory (Section 4, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
B. Episodic memory
C. Implicit memory
D. Declarative memory
E. Nonassociative memory
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter07.html 15/15



1/7/25, 10:08 AM Limbic System: Amygdala (Section 4, Chapter 6) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department …
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 4: Homeostasis and Higher Brain Functions
Search
Chapter 6: Limbic System: Amygdala
Anthony Wright, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
Revised 10 Oct 2020
6.1 Amygdala - General Considerations
Amygdala is the integrative center for emotions, emotional behavior, and motivation. If the brain is turned upside down the end of
the structure continuous with the hippocampus is called the uncus. If you peel away uncus you will expose the amygdala which
abuts the anterior of the hippocampus. Just like with the hippocampus, major pathways communicate bidirectionally and contain
both efferent and afferent fibers.
Figure 6.1
Relationship of the amygdala to some other brain structures.
6.2 Inputs to the Amygdala
Figure 6.2
Inputs or afferents to
the amygdala via the
stria terminalis, ventral
amygdalofugal pathway,
olfactory stria, and
directly from temporal
lobe structures.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter06.html 1/7

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Limbic System: Amygdala (Section 4, Chapter 6) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department …
As was the case with the hippocampus, fibers carrying inputs to the amygdala are in virtually all cases combined with fibers
carrying outputs from the amygdala.
The amygdala receives inputs from all senses as well as visceral inputs. Since the amygdala is very important in emotional learning
it is not surprising that visceral inputs are a major input source. Visceral inputs come from the hypothalamus, septal area, orbital
cortex, and parabrachial nucleus. Olfactory sensory information comes from the olfactory bulb. Auditory, visual and somatosensory
information comes from the temporal and anterior cingulate cortices.
Figure 6.3
Outputs or efferents from the amygdala via the stria terminalis, ventral
amygdalofugal pathway, and direct pathways.
6.3 Major Output Pathways of the Amygdala
1. Ventral amygdalofugal pathway
2. Stria terminalis
3. Directly to the hippocampus
4. Directly to the entorhinal cortex
5. Directly to the dorsomedial nucleus of the thalamus
6.4 Ventral Amygdalofugal Pathway
Ventral Amygdalofugal Pathway. The term "fugal" comes from the word fuge—to drive away—as in fugitive. This pathway continues
to the anterior olfactory nucleus, anterior perforated substance, piriform cortex, orbitofrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, and
ventral striatum. The ventral striatum includes part of the caudate, putamen, and the nucleus accumbens septi (nucleus that
reclines on the septum). Projections from the ventral striatum are links in a basal ganglia circuit that are important in stimulus-
response associative learning. The ventral amygdalofugal pathway also connects to the hypothalamus and septal nucleus, but the
amygdala's major connection to the hypothalamus and septal nucleus is through the stria terminalis.
The ventral amygdalofugal pathway is important because it is a link whereby motivation and drives, through the limbic system, can
influence responses. It is also a link whereby responses are learned. In this case this is the link whereby associative learning takes
place. That is where responses are associated with appetitive and aversive consequences that is rewards and punishers.
Three simplifications:
1. The stria terminalis is similar in form, function, and location as the fornix for the hippocampal pathway. Thus by way of
analogy one can say that the stria terminalis is to the amygdala as the fornix is to the hippocampus. Stria is a Latin word that
means line, groove, or band. Related to the word "striated".
2. The stria terminalis connects only to subcortical structures. (Connection to cortical structures is through the ventral
amygdalofugal pathway.)
3. The stria terminalis overlaps with the ventral amygdalofugal pathway in that it also connects to the septal nuclei and
hypothalamus and thus forms a loop.
More on similarities to the fornix:
Like the fornix, the stria terminalis has precommissural and postcommissural branches in relation to the anterior commissure. The
precommissural branch goes to the septal area. This is exactly what the fornix does. The postcommissural branch goes to the
hypothalamus. This is exactly what the fornix does. Whereas the postcommissural branch of the fornix projects to mammillary
bodies of the hypothalamus, the postcommissural branch of the stria terminalis projects to the lateral nucleus and ventral-medial
nucleus of the hypothalamus.
As with the fornix, some fibers enter anterior commissure cross to the contralateral side. Just as in the case of the two hippocampi
communicating with each other through the anterior commissure, the two amygdala communicate with each other through the
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter06.html 2/7

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Limbic System: Amygdala (Section 4, Chapter 6) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department …
anterior commissure.
The stria terminalis also projects to the habenula, which is part of the epithalamus.
The central nucleus of the amygdala produces autonomic components of emotion (e.g., changes in heart rate, blood pressure, and
respiration) primarily through output pathways to the lateral hypothalamus and brain stem.
The central nucleus of the amygdala also produces conscious perception of emotion primarily through the ventral amygdalofugal
output pathway to the anterior cingulate cortex, orbitofrontal cortex, and prefrontal cortex.
6.5 More on Function of the Amygdala
Stimulation of the amygdala causes intense emotion, such as aggression or fear.
Irritative lesions of temporal lobe epilepsy have the effect of stimulating the amygdala. In its extreme form irritative lesions of
temporal lobe epilepsy can cause a panic attack. Panic attacks are brief spontaneously recurrent episodes of terror that generate a
sense of impending disaster without a clearly identifiable cause. PET scans have shown an increase in blood flow to the
parahippocampal gyri, beginning with the right parahippocampal gyrus. Similar but attenuated blood flow increases occurs during
anxiety attacks.
Destructive lesions such as ablation of the amygdala cause an effect opposite to the irritative lesions of temporal lobe epilepsy.
Destructive lesions of the amygdala cause tameness in animals, and a placid calmness in humans characterized as a flatness of
affect. Lesions of the amygdala can occur as a result of Urbach-Wiethe disease where calcium is deposited in the amygdala. If this
disease occurs early in life then these patients with bilateral amygdala lesions cannot discriminate emotion in facial expressions, but
their ability to identify faces remains. The anatomical area for face recognition and memory is in the multimodal association area of
the inferotemporal cortex. This is a good example of how emotion in one area (amygdala) is linked with perception in another area
(inferotemporal cortex) to create an intense emotionally charged memory.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter06.html 3/7

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Limbic System: Amygdala (Section 4, Chapter 6) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department …
Figure 6.4
fMRI results showing
amygdala activity in
normal viewing facial
expressions from happy to
fearful.
Flatness of affect is one of the symptoms of the previously mentioned Kluver-Bucy syndrome where the entire temporal lobes of
monkeys were removed. Actually,just lesions of the amygdala were shown to be primarily responsible for flatness of affect. This
work eventually led to the psychosurgical technique of prefrontal lobotomies. Remember the movie with Jack Nicholson, “One Flew
Over the Cuckoo’s Nest.” The prefrontal cortex inputs into the amygdala. By severing this input a flatness of affect is produced
which was thought to be desirable in schizophrenic patients who were aggressively violent or emotionally agitated.
The amygdala combines many different sensory inputs. Like the hippocampus it combines external and internal stimuli. Every
sensory modality has input. These are integrated with somatosensory and visceral inputs—this is where you get your “gut reaction”.
The link between prefrontal cortex, septal area, hypothalamus, and amygdala likely gives us our gut feelings, those subjective
feelings, about what is good and what is bad.
It is also where memory and emotions are combined. When the reward is particularly sweet, that behavior and association may last
a lifetime. Likewise, the trauma and humiliation of punishment may be remembered for a long time too.
6.6 Fear Conditioning: An Example of the Role of the Amygdala in Learning
Another example of emotion being linked to some perceptual experience is fear conditioning. In this example the sensory
experience is auditory rather than visual as in the emotion of faces. Much of what we know about the amygdala and its role in
emotional learning and memory comes from fear conditioning, mostly but not exclusively conducted with animals. This is an
example of classical conditioning or Pavlovian conditioning. In the classic experiments conducted by Pavlov just after the turn of the
century, a neutral stimulus—a bell—was sounded and after a brief interval food powder—the unconditioned stimulus—was placed in
the dog’s mouth. After a few such pairings the dog would salivate to the sound of the bell. The crucial aspect of classical
conditioning is that it is a pairing between two stimuli. No response is required to get the reward. In fear conditioning, an organism
hears a noise or sees a visual stimulus. A few seconds, later it receives a mild shock. The reactions involve freezing, elevated blood
pressure and heart rate, and it gets twitchy—startles easily.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter06.html 4/7

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Limbic System: Amygdala (Section 4, Chapter 6) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department …
Figure 6.5
Animals showing fear conditioning.
Figure 6.6 (top) and 6.7 (bottom)
Pathways of fear conditioning and emotional information.
Pathways from the thalamus to the amygdala are particularly important in emotional learning. Output pathways from the central
nucleus of the amygdala make extensive connections with the brain stem for emotional responses and extensive connections with
cortical areas through the nucleus basalis. Cholinergic projections from the nucleus basalis to the cortex are thought to arouse the
cortex.
The following diagram provides additional information on outputs controlled by the amygdala during fear conditioning.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter06.html 5/7

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Limbic System: Amygdala (Section 4, Chapter 6) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department …
Figure 6.8
Expression of different emotional responses by the amygdala.
Some pathways of fear conditioning have been discovered and this is a hot research topic in neuroscience. If the auditory cortex
pathway is lesioned, for example, basic fear conditioning is unaltered, but discrimination is altered. In the discrimination procedure
one sound is paired with shock and another sound is not paired with shock. The animals had to rely solely on the thalamus and
amygdala for learning and they could not learn the discrimination; apparently the two stimuli were indistinguishable.
So, the cortex is not needed for simple fear conditioning; instead it allows us to recognize an object by sight or sound— to interpret
the environment.
Thus, pathways from the sensory thalamus provide only a crude perception of the world, but because they involve only one neural
link they are fast pathways. Why might FAST be important? We need a quick reaction to potential danger. The thalamus—amygdala
pathway provides us with this and may also prepare the amygdala to receive more highly processed information from the cortex.
On the other hand, pathways from the cortex offer detailed and accurate representations of the environment. Because these
pathways have multiple neural links they are slow by comparison.
If for example we see a slender curled shape behind a tree its much better to jump back and later recognize its a garden hose than
to fail to quickly jump back if it were a snake. There is plenty of time later to reflect that it was foolish to be startled in our own
secure garden where there are no snakes.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter06.html 6/7

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Limbic System: Amygdala (Section 4, Chapter 6) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department …
Figure 6.9 Figure 6.10
Cortical vs. subcortical pathways of fear conditioning.
Fear producing visual stimuli is quickly processed by the thalamus and this information is passed to the amygdala (red) producing a
quick response (green) to danger. The thalamus also passes the information to the cortex so that more careful (and slower)
judgments can be made about the real potential danger.
The amygdala is involved in pleasureful emotional learning as well as fearful emotional learning. Consider instrumental learning.
Unlike classical conditioning where two stimuli are paired, in instrumental conditioning responses are followed by reward and
stimulus-response associations are learned. There are thus three events: a stimulus, a response, and a reward. It has become clear
that all three pairwise combinations are learned in instrumental conditioning. Where the amygdala comes in is that lesions of the
basolateral nuclei of the amygdala disrupt the association the stimulus and rewarding attributes of the food.
This amygdala memory system serves as an example of memory systems generally. The establishment of memories is a function of
the entire network, not any single component. The amygdala is involved in a kind of primitive emotional memory, one that is likely
preserved by evolution. According to the diagram of memory systems (e.g., Nolte, p.577), declarative memory is mediated by the
hippocampus and the cortex. But like the cortex, lesions of the hippocampus have little effect on fear conditioning except in
discriminating environmental stimuli.
A study of patients with damage to the amygdala, hippocampus, or both clearly demonstrates the distinctive roles of these two
structures in memory. These patients were shown slides of green, blue, yellow, or red colors. After some colors, a loud and
frightening horn blast was sounded. Autonomic responses were recorded (via GSR recordings) to determine learning. Amygdala
patients did not become conditioned to colors followed by the loud horn. But when asked how many colors were presented and
which were followed by the horn, their recall was correct. That is, they had explicit memory about the events. On the other hand,
hippocampal patients showed learning and conditioning to the colors followed by the horn, but could not recall which they were.
That is, they had implicit memory about the events. Patients with both types of lesions showed no conditioning and had no explicit
memory about which colors were followed by the horn. The chapter on Learning and Memory will explain more about explicit
memory and the hippocampus.
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter06.html 7/7



1/7/25, 10:08 AM Limbic System: Hippocampus (Section 4, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Departm…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 4: Homeostasis and Higher Brain Functions
Search
Chapter 5: Limbic System: Hippocampus
Anthony Wright, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
Revised 10 Oct 2020
5.1 Introduction to the Limbic System
Limbic is a Latin term which means border. Like the familiar word “limbo”, it means an intermediate or transitional state, which is a
border. In this case, the border is between the neocortex and the subcortical structures (diencephalon). The limbic system includes
the hippocampal formation, amygdala, septal nuclei, cingulate cortex, entorhinal cortex, perirhinal cortex, and parahippocampal
cortex. These last three cortical areas comprise different portions of the temporal lobe. (Some experts would also include parts of
the hypothalamus, thalamus, midbrain reticular formation, and olfactory areas in the limbic system.)
5.2 Hippocampus
The term hippocampal formation typically refers to the dentate gyrus, the hippocampus proper (i.e., cornu ammonis), and the
subicular cortex. A hippocampal formation is located in the temporal lobe of each cerebral cortex, medial to the inferior horn of the
lateral ventricle.
Hippocampus means seahorse in Greek. Each hippocampus looks like a seahorse due to the way it is folded during development.
Dentate gyrus Figure 5.1 (above)
Cross-section of hippocampus
Hippocampal gryus - Ammon's horn and its similarity to the
seahorse.
Subiculum = transition zone
Figure 5.2 (left)
Hippocampal gryus - Ammon's horn
Development of the
hippocampus in cross-section.
PLAY © 2010 UTHSC-H
The hippocampus is also called cornu ammonis. Ammon was an Egyptian god, near whose temple ammonia or the salt of Ammon
was prepared. The hippocampus is also called Ammon’s Horn because the two hippocampi bend around in the form of the horns of
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter05.html 1/8

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Limbic System: Hippocampus (Section 4, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Departm…
a ram.
Figure 5.3
Schematic drawing showing the major and surrounding structures of the limbic system.
5.3 Overall Structure of the Hippocampus, Fornix, and Anterior Commissure
Content on this
page requires a
newer version
of Adobe Flash
Player.
Figure 5.4
Structure of the
hippocampus,
uncus, crua,
fornix, anterior
commissure,
precommissural
fornix,
postcommissural
fornix, and
columns.
The fornix is a “C” shaped tract (in sagittal section). The fornix begins as the bundle of fibers called the alveus. The alveus is white
matter consisting of myelinated afferents and efferents. As the fibers of the alveus travel posteriorly, they aggregate medially to
form the fimbria of the fornix. Fimbria means fringe and in this case it is the fringe of the hippocampus. The fimbria looks like a
thick rubber band. The fimbria of each hippocampus thickens as it moves posteriorly and eventually splits off from the hippocampus
forming the crua or “legs” (singular—crus) of each hippocampus. The two crua come together and form the hippocampal
commissure. The hippocampal commissure provides one of two major paths whereby the hippocampi communicate with each other.
After the hippocampal commissure the single fiber bundle is properly referred to as the fornix. The fornix continues in an arc to the
anterior commissure.
The anterior commissure is important as a landmark because this is where the fornix splits into three parts and goes to different
structures:
1. The split just before the anterior commissure is called the precommissural fornix and this branch goes to the septal nuclei, the
ventral striatum, and the cingulate cortex.
2. Some fibers from the fornix also pass through the anterior commissure to the contralateral hippocampus. This is the second of
the two major paths by which the hippocampi communicate with each other.
3. The split after the anterior commissure is called the postcommissural fornix and this branch goes to the mammillary bodies of
the hypothalamus and the anterior nuclei of the thalamus.
5.4 Output Pathways of the Hippocampus
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter05.html 2/8

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Limbic System: Hippocampus (Section 4, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Departm…
Figure 5.5
Outputs or efferents from the
hippocampus pass directly from
the subiculum to the entorhinal
cortex and amygdala or through
the fornix to a variety of
anterior structures. Click on any
of the labels to see its location
identified by a green haze.
It is important to remember that afferents and efferents of the hippocampus are bundled together in the same paths. Thus, by
knowing the output paths, for example, you will also know the input paths, or vice versa.
Two major pathways into and out of the hippocampus are the fornix and entorhinal cortex (via the cingulate cortex). The
precommissural branch of the fornix connects to the septal nuclei, preoptic nuclei, ventral striatum, orbital cortex and anterior
cingulate cortex. The postcommissural branch of the fornix connects to the anterior nucleus of the thalamus and the mammillary
bodies of the hypothalamus. The mammillary bodies are destroyed in Korsakoff’s syndrome as the result of alcoholism and thiamine
deficiency. Patients with Korsakoff’s syndrome have profound difficulty forming new memories. Because the mammillothalamic tract
also goes to the anterior thalamic nucleus, the hippocampus can affect the thalamus indirectly as well as directly.
The anterior thalamic nuclei in turn connect to the cingulate cortex. The cingulate cortex projects back to the entorhinal cortex of
parahippocampal gyrus, completing a “great” loop called the Papez circuit. The Papez circuit like many other areas of the limbic
system is involved in learning and memory, emotion, and social behavior, and was originally thought (by James Papez) to the
anatomical substrate of emotional experience. The amygdala, along with neocortical areas, are now known to be centrally involved
in emotional experience. Its connections to the original Papez circuit are shown in the next figure and the amygdala and emotion
are discussed more thoroughly in the next section.
Figure 5.6
The original
circuit proposed
by Papez is
shown by thick
lines and more
recent
connections are
shown by thin
lines. Note the
reciprocal
connections
between the
hippocampal
formation and
the association
cortex, and the
inclusion of the
amygdala and
prefrontal cortex.
The hippocampus has direct connections to the entorhinal cortex (via the subiculum) and the amygdala. These structures connect
to many other areas of the brain. The entorhinal cortex projects to the cingulate cortex. Therefore, the hippocampus can affect the
cingulate cortex through the anterior thalamic nucleus or the entorhinal cortex. The cingulate cortex, in turn, projects to the
temporal lobe cortex, orbital cortex, and olfactory bulb. Thus, all of these areas can be influenced by the hippocampus.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter05.html 3/8

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Limbic System: Hippocampus (Section 4, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Departm…
5.5 Input Pathways of the Hippocampus
Figure 5.7
Press the play button to
see original Papez circuit.
Figure 5.8
Inputs or afferents to the
hippocampus. Major inputs
come from the entorhinal
cortex, which in turn
communicate inputs from
the cingulate, temporal,
orbital, and olfactory
cortices and amygdala to
the hippocampus.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter05.html 4/8

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Limbic System: Hippocampus (Section 4, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Departm…
The input paths are just the reverse of the output paths. The entorhinal cortex is a major source of inputs to the hippocampus. In
addition, the cingulate cortex, temporal lobe cortex, amygdala, orbital cortex, and olfactory bulb all have inputs to the hippocampus
via the entorhinal cortex.
The hippocampus receives inputs via the precommissural branch of the fornix from the nucleus basalis of Meynert, which is a
portion of the substantia innominata and which in turn is a portion of the septal nuclei. Also the hippocampus receives inputs via
the postcommissural branch of the fornix inputs from the mammillary bodies of the hypothalamus.
5.6 Structures and Processes within the Hippocampus
Figure 5.9
Structure of the hippocampus.
The medial section showing
the right hemisphere. The line
CA
shows location of a cut
Fimbria through the left hemisphere. A
Alveus
blowup of the cut surface
through the hippocampus
Dentate shows the relationship of the
gyrus hippocampal formation to the
Dentate entorhinal and
Hippocampus gyrus parahippocampal cortices. The
proper box diagram shows output and
input pathways through the
Uncus
hippocampus.
Subiculum
The hippocampus proper and the dentate gyrus processes information that passes through the hippocampus. These two structures,
the hippocampus proper and the dentate gyrus, form two interlocking “Cs.” The term dentate gyrus comes from the beaded or
toothed appearance of this structure resulting from the many small blood vessels from subarachnoid space that penetrate the
dentate gyrus. The hippocampus and dentate gyrus are actually cortex, but it is 3-layered cortex rather than 6-layered cortex as in
the neocortex. Because of the smaller number of layers and their location between the neocortex and diencephalon, these cortices
have been called paleocortex, which means old cortex or archicortex which means ancient cortex. These terms are misleading
because they give the false impression that these cortices are antiquated remnants left over as the brain evolved and became more
complex. They are brain regions that have actually continued to develop structurally and functionally throughout phylogeny.
The hippocampus and dentate gyrus, like the neocortex, have a superficial molecular layer and a deep polymorphic layer. But
because these structures are "inside-out" cortex, the molecular layer is on the inside and the polymorphic layer is on the outside.
The middle layer of the hippocampus proper is a pyramidal cell layer. The middle layer of the dentate gyrus is a granular layer. The
molecular layer of the hippocampus proper faces the dentate gyrus. The area of the hippocampus proper that is capped by the
dentate gyrus is referred to as CA3 (CA for cornu ammonis).
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter05.html 5/8

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Limbic System: Hippocampus (Section 4, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Departm…
The polymorphic layer is the alveus and is equivalent to the white matter of the neocortex. The subiculum is the transition layer
from the hippocampus to the parahippocampal gyrus and changes gradually from three to six layers.
The hippocampus coordinates information from a variety of sources. A major flow of information through the hippocampus is a one-
way circuit. Some inputs to the hippocampus (perforant pathway) from the entorhinal cortex pass through to the dentate gyrus.
From the dentate gyrus connections are made to CA3 of the hippocampus proper via mossy fibers and to CA1 via Schaffer
collaterals. From these two CA fields information then passes through the subiculum entering the alveus, fimbria, and fornix and
then to other areas of the brain.
Figure 5.10
Slice through the
hippocampal formation
showing the location of CA1
and CA3 cells and the
Dentate gyrus.
Information flows into and through the hippocampus by three principal pathways: 1. the perforant pathway from the entorhinal
cortex to granule cells of the dentate gyrus; 2. the mossy fiber pathway from the granule cell of the dentate gyrus to the pyramidal
cells of the CA3 region of the hippocampus; and 3. the Schaffer collateral pathway from the CA3 region of the hippocampus to the
CA1 region of the hippocampus.
© 2010 UTHSC-H
Pyramidal CA1
neuron
Granule neuron CA3
Entorhinal
cortex
Dentate
gyrus Pyramidal
PLAY neuron
Figure 5.11
Another view of the three-cell circuit of the hippocampal
formation.
5.7 Mechanisms of Hippocampal Function
Temporal Lobe Epilepsy
Identification of an epileptic seizure can be made through EEG (Electroencephalogram) recordings. The EEG records from hundreds
of thousands of neurons from scalp electrodes. A few electrodes are placed on the scalp. Voltage differences are recorded relative
to a reference electrode some distance from the site.
The pyramidal cells of the middle layer of the hippocampus proper are the major input of the EEG recording. The pyramidal cells
have specialized structures for input called dendritic spines, little spines that are attached to the dendritic shafts. The pyramidal
cells are glutamate excitatory neurons and are the major neurons that project to the cerebral cortex and are the major driving force
of temporal lobe epilepsy.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter05.html 6/8

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Limbic System: Hippocampus (Section 4, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Departm…
Figure 5.12 Figure 5.13
Schematic diagram of pyramidal cell showing its different inputs Schematic diagram of the relationship between a pyramidal neuron,
a basket cell, and the resulting recurrent inhibition.
Special Properties of Hippocampal Pyramidal Cells:
a. The dendrites are parallel to one another resulting in summation of extracellular current flow and hyper-excitability seen in
epilepsy.
b. The pyramidal dendrites are perpendicular to the cortical surface resulting in different layers of cortex impinging at different
points along the dendritic tree.
c. The pyramidal dendrites contain dendritic spines that amplify currents (inputs) so that distant synaptic sites can more easily
generate action potentials.
d. The pyramidal cells (dendrites) receive inputs from basket cells that regulate excitability of the pyramidal cells through
recurrent inhibition.
Pyramidal cells would be in a continuous bursting firing mode if there were no basket cells. The diagram shows a cartoon pyramidal
cell, axon, excitatory collateral to basket cell, basket cell, and inhibitory connection to pyramidal cell. This simple circuit is what is
called recurrent inhibition. This is a general feature of nervous system, a collateral to a special cell—the basket cell. The pyramidal
cell excites the basket cell. Excitation of the basket cell in turn produces negative feedback or inhibition of the pyramidal cell. That
is, action of the pyramidal cell acts through the basket cell to regulate its own activity. The neurotransmitter of the basket cell is
GABA or gamma-aminobutyric acid, typical of most inhibitory neurons.
Epilepsy is a synchronous discharge of pyramidal cells. This synchronous discharge produces stereotyped and involuntary jerking
movements, loss of awareness, and in the most extreme case convulsions and loss of consciousness. Next to stroke, epilepsy is the
most common neurological disease. Possibly as much as 1% of the population is affected at one time or the other.
Focal or partial epilepsy is restricted to a particular brain region. But an epileptic attack can begin as a focal attack and spread to
other cortical areas and become a generalized seizure.
For an epileptic seizure hundreds of thousands of neurons must be firing in synchrony. The way this happens is a breakdown in
postsynaptic inhibition. The importance of inhibition and the role of the basket cell can be demonstrated by disabling the connection
between the basket cell and the pyramidal cell.
Picrotoxin, a GABA antagonist, will disable this junction and results in a cascade of excitation and the synchronous activity of an
epileptic seizure.
Also, examination of sections through the hippocampus in patients with temporal lobe epilepsy has shown a loss of cells in the
plexus surrounding pyramidal cells. This is where the basket cells are typically found. Thus, there is a loss of the inhibitory input
that is normally found there. The brake on the system, that is control of the burst firing of pyramidal cells, has been removed when
the basket cells have been removed.
Long-term Potentiation
Long-term potentiation (or LTP) was discovered by efforts to determine how the hippocampus might determine memory. Patient
H.M. had just recently demonstrated that the hippocampus was critical in lying down new memories. Researchers found that neural
activity can modify synaptic strength in certain areas of the hippocampus. This modified synaptic strength (LTP) may be a storage
mechanism for memory. For more information on LTP and how it is involved in memory formation, see the chapter on Learning and
Memory.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter05.html 7/8

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Limbic System: Hippocampus (Section 4, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Departm…
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
The postcommissural fornix projects to which structure?
A. Substantia innominata.
B. Mammillary bodies
C. Ventromedial nuclei of the hypothalamus
D. Nucleus basalis of Meynert
E. Anterior cingulate cortex.
Question 2 A B C D E
Which structure is NOT part of the Papez circuit?
A. Anterior nucleus of the thalamus
B. Ventral nucleus of the thalamus
C. Cingulate gyrus
D. Hippocampus
E. Mammillary bodies
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter05.html 8/8



1/7/25, 10:08 AM Central Control of Feeding Behavior (Section 4, Chapter 4) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 4: Homeostasis and Higher Brain Functions
Search
Chapter 4: Central Control of Feeding Behavior
Patrick Dougherty, Ph.D., Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, MD Anderson Cancer Center
Revised 10 Oct 2020
Feeding by its nature is intermittent, yet the need for energy in tissues is constant. Thus, mechanisms have evolved for the ebb
and flow of nutrients after feeding and during the post-absorptive period; and the maintenance of near-normal function during
fasting. The remarkable stability of body weight in persons with access to adequate food supplies is testament to the precision by
which metabolic needs are monitored and maintained. Aberrations in these controls can produce serious and even life-threatening
conditions.
Figure 4.1
Scheme of caloric flow with feeding (solid lines) and while fasting
(dotted lines)
4.1 Theories of Caloric Homeostasis
Two major hypotheses have been put forward to account for the process by which the usual balance in caloric intake is established.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter04.html 1/7

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Central Control of Feeding Behavior (Section 4, Chapter 4) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
Figure 4.2
Schematic of the depletion-repletion hypothesis of caloric homeostasis.
The Depletion-repletion Hypothesis. The depletion-repletion hypothesis is essentially based on the idea of a caloric set-point. In
its simplest version individuals match energy expenditure and energy intake without reference to the level of fat storage. In more
complicated models fat (energy) depots, and presumably other nutrient depots, send signals to the brain about their current status.
These inputs are compared to desired set points and food intake and energy expenditure are modified to effect adjustments to the
levels of stores. The best evidence for this view is from small mammals. Glucose-responsive neurons that increase firing rate with
glucose levels and glucose-sensitive neurons that are stimulated as glucose levels fall have been identified. Further, small mammals
will habitually return to a body mass that is appropriate for their age, stage of development and/or environment after a forced
perturbation. Thus, rats exposed to a period of food restriction or imposed overfeeding (gavage) express a compensatory hyper- or
hypophagia on return to ad libitum feeding. The current studies on leptin (see below) has heightened interest in this potential
mechanism.
The Primed Response Hypothesis. This hypothesis essentially boils down to the idea that animals will eat whenever an
opportunity presents itself unless it is specifically inhibited. Evidence in support of this idea comes from studies examining the
relationship between caloric content in meals and feeding intervals. There is not a correlation between the amount eaten in a meal
and the interval to the previous meal. Rather, the larger a given meal, the longer it will be to the next. This suggests that eating is
inhibited by satiety signals generated in response to a meal.
4.2 Mechanisms of Satiety
There are two main issues in the concept of satiety. The first concerns the mechanisms that contribute to the termination of feeding
at a given meal, whereas the second concerns the mechanisms that govern interprandial intervals. These mechanisms overlap to a
degree.
Neural Signals are essentially dependent on the vagus and involve both afferent and efferent components. The afferent signals in
the vagus conveyed to the brain that function to limit meal size include information from stretch receptors in the stomach wall, and
sensors in the portal blood vessels for cholecystokinin (CCK), glucose, osmolality and pH. All these stimuli limit meal size. Vagal
afferents synapse in the nucleus of the solitary tract. In addition, the vagus sends afferents to the area postrema. These sites send
projections to the paraventricular nucleus to inhibit feeding. The vagus also functions in an afferent capacity in that input from the
vagus to the pancreas mediates the cephalic phase of insulin release. The sight and smell of food initiates activity in limbic cortex
that in turn activates the central autonomic network. Outflow to the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus and finally to the pancreas
results in the first surge of insulin in the blood that accompanies a meal. Two additional increases in plasma insulin later occur as
food enters the gut (the gastrointestinal phase) and then as nutrients enter the intestines (the substrate phase). In fact, these
stimuli also result in satiety as insulin not only promotes energy storage but also acts as a humoral signal back to the brain for
satiety.
Humoral Signals for satiety are an extremely hot topic of research due to the vast potential weight-control market. The main
factors in the blood that affect the CNS to limit/promote feeding are insulin, leptin, glucose, and CCK. Insulin, leptin and glucose
gain access to the CNS at the circumventricular organs of the median eminence and the area postrema and act on specific
receptors in neurons of the nuclear cell groups adjoining these areas. Insulin and leptin have received considerable recent interest
as the mediators of satiety signals related to the caloric content of a meal and in relation to maintenance of a body weight set
point, respectively. Chief among the CNS sites of action for these compounds as discussed below is the arcuate nucleus. CCK exerts
its chief effects on satiety in the periphery by an action on the vagus to potentiate the responses to glucose, pH, and osmolality in
the portal blood. CCK derived from neurons in the hypothalamus is also a transmitter substance in the CNS satiety network (see
below).
4.3 The CNS Satiety Network
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter04.html 2/7

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Central Control of Feeding Behavior (Section 4, Chapter 4) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
Figure 4.3
The effect of hypothalamic lesions on feeding. Lateral lesions produce thin,
anorectic rats, whereas medial lesions result in obese hyperphagic rats.
The Dual Center Hypothesis evolved about fifty years ago when it was demonstrated that bilateral lesions placed in the region of
the ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH) produced a condition of voracious appetite and resulting marked hyperphagia. These
animals would ultimately become remarkably obese. On the other hand, bilateral lesions of the ventrolateral hypothalamus (VLH)
produced an anorexic condition that resulted in animals failing to feed and ultimately wasting. The assumption behind this set of
experiments was that there are specific feeding and satiety centers. The conclusion in this set of experiments was that the feeding
center was the VLH and the satiety center was the VMH. Although this dual center hypothesis has proven useful, the CNS satiety
network has proven to be more complex. More recent repetitions of the earlier lesion studies showed that in fact animals with VMH
lesions would not eat continually without limit, nor would the animals with VLH lesions necessarily starve to death. Rather, the VMH
lesioned animals would eat excessively until they reached some new higher body weight at which point they would then reduce
their food consumption to maintain this new set point. Likewise, once the VLH lesioned animals had dropped to some new level,
they would again eat normally to maintain the new lower body weight set-point. These studies indicate that satiety and feeding is a
balancing process between two major groups of neurochemical pathways that ultimately govern the relative tone between the
sympathetic and parasympathetic components of the central autonomic network. The main entry points for information to this
network are both neural and humoral. The neural inputs are from the vagus nerve via synapses in the nucleus of the solitary tract
and the area postrema as well as inputs from the raphe nuclei. These inputs ascend in the medial forebrain bundle to the
paraventricular and the lateral hypothalamic area (LHA). The humoral inputs pass the circumventricular organs and affect the area
postrema and the arcuate nucleus. The arcuate nucleus projects into the LHA and the ventromedial nucleus as well as to the
paraventricular and dorsomedial (DM) nucleus. The paraventricular nucleus returns inputs to the arcuate nucleus as well as to the
VMH and LHA. There are no direct interconnections between the VMH and LHA, rather these are processed through the DM.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter04.html 3/7

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Central Control of Feeding Behavior (Section 4, Chapter 4) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
Figure 4.4
Schematic of hypothalamic circuitry underlying satiety.
Neurochemistry. Several peptides are involved in hypothalamic regulation of feeding and body mass. These can be sorted based
on their behavioral effects into anabolic/orexigenic peptides that promote feeding and increase of body mass or as
catabolic/anorexigenic peptides. Each set of peptides includes what appears to be a key signal molecule that promotes either
feeding or satiety as well as an antagonist of the opposing stimulus.
Figure 4.5
Schematic of the neurochemistry of the hypothalamic satiety network.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter04.html 4/7

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Central Control of Feeding Behavior (Section 4, Chapter 4) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
Anabolic/orexigenic peptides include neuropeptide Y (NPY), agouti-related protein (AGRP), melanin-concentrating hormone
(MCH), orexin, and galanin. NPY is the key feeding-promoting neuropeptide and NPY receptor subtype 5 is the key site of
action. NPY increases in the arcuate nucleus within 6 hours of food deprivation. Of note the neurons that express NPY in
rodents also express receptors for leptin and insulin and so are yoked to plasma-derived feeding signals. AGRP is an
antagonist for the anorexigenic peptides as it blocks the MC3 and 4 receptors for γ- and α-melanocyte-stimulating hormones,
respectively.
Catabolic/anorexigenic peptides include a-melanocyte stimulating hormone (a-MSH), cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated
transcript (CART), glucagon-like peptides 1 and 2 (GLP-1, GLP-2) and prolactin-releasing peptide (PrlRP). These peptides fall
with food deprivation and conversely rise with forced overfeeding. For example, corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) increases
in the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) and pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) increases in the arcuate nucleus with overfeeding. The
key anorexigenic signals are α- and less so γ-MSH acting at the MC4 and MC3 receptors, respectively. The antagonist in this
group for the orexigenic peptide NPY is CART.
4.4 Disorders of Feeding and Satiety
Obesity is characterized by an excess of adipose tissue, however, the exact definition of “excess” is somewhat enigmatic. The
simplest way to define “excess” is that amount of adipose tissue that creates a health risk. The best index at present is that this
represents an amount of adipose tissue that puts an individual 20% or greater above their ideal body weight. Using these criteria
somewhere between 20 and 40 percent of adults are obese with these rates over-representative by minorities and the poor. Excess
intake of calories is the usual major contributor to obesity. Basal metabolic rate in a 70kg man is about 1500 calories/day, so
anything above this in a sedentary, healthy individual will result in weight gain. Another mechanism besides excess caloric intake
that may contribute to obesity is the lipoprotein lipase hypothesis in which an excess of adipose tissue lipoprotein lipase
preferentially stores lipid calories as adipose tissue. Obesity has several important metabolic sequela that can contribute to
additional medical problems.
1. Hyperinsulinemia with hyper- or euglycemia. Insulin resistance may develop due to an abnormal beta cell product, circulating
antibodies or tissue insulin insensitivity. Insulin insensitivity results due to a combination of receptor and post-receptor defects
in insulin action.
2. Hyperlipoproteinemia. Obesity is characterized by elevated VLDL and elevated serum triglyceride and an increase in serum
free fatty acid turnover.
3. Hypertension, Hypoventilation (Pickwickian Syndrome) are often observed in the obese patient. Other endocrine disorders
may also develop.
Froehlich’s Syndrome is characterized by obesity, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and other variable features including diabetes
insipidus, visual impairment and mental retardation. It is thought to result due to a hypothalamic lesion.
Anorexia Nervosa is a disorder almost exclusively seen in young, white women of middle-class background, with a prevalence of
as high as 1 per 100 being reported. Subclinical prevalence may be as high as 5 percent. Diagnosis is made on a clinical basis as
there is no diagnostic test. Patients observed to be below about 80% of ideal body weight are suspect when no other medical
(psychological) causes can be identified. A disordered attitude toward eating, food or weight that overrides hunger, ritualized
exercise, amenorrhea, bradycardia, hypotension, and hypothermia complete the usual clinical picture. Patients with anorexia are
vulnerable to sudden death from ventricular tachyarrhythmias. There is no specific treatment as yet because the underlying
mechanisms are not defined. However, a recent study has shown that a significant number of these patients and those with bulimia
have plasma antibodies against pituitary and hypothalamic melanotropes and/or corticotropes suggesting an underlying
autoimmune disorder.
Bulimia is often considered a disorder related to anorexia nervosa. The disorder is characterized by the episodic ingestion of large
amounts of food in a compulsive fashion (“ox-hunger”) coupled with the awareness that the eating pattern is abnormal, that it
cannot be stopped, and depression at completion of the act. There is usually a morbid fear of becoming fat, although body weight is
usually in the normal range. Induced vomiting that eventually becomes reflexive usually follows episodes of binge eating. Patients
frequently have additional behavioral/psychiatric abnormalities.
4.5 Summary
Caloric homeostasis is maintained by a body weight set point. This set point is at least in part maintained by a set of signals from
peripheral energy stores into the brain that stimulate feeding to maintain adequate stores of nutrients. Feeding also appears to
largely occur as a primed response whenever food is available and that continues until inhibitory satiety signals are received in the
brain that are derived from a meal.
Cessation of feeding in a given meal and the time to the next meal is determined by neural and humoral signals derived from that
meal. The neural signals come from the vagus and include information concerning the size (stretch of stomach) and caloric/nutrient
content (portal glucose, plasma insulin, leptin).
The CNS satiety network is a subdivision of the central autonomic network. Thus, it includes the brainstem afferent and efferent
relays for the vagus as well as the brainstem sympathetic relays such as nuclear group A2 and the raphe system. The arcuate
nucleus and less so the area postrema are key sites for registration of humoral inputs to this network. Integrated activity between
the ventromedial, dorsomedial and lateral hypothalamic areas ultimately is integrated at the paraventricular nucleus that
determines a net balance between the feeding promoting central parasympathetic circuitry and the satiety-promoting central
sympathetic circuitry.
Test Your Knowledge
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter04.html 5/7

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Central Control of Feeding Behavior (Section 4, Chapter 4) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
Question 1 A B C D E
Humoral satiety influence neural activity in all of the following sites EXCEPT:
A. median eminence
B. subfornical organ
C. area postrema
D. vagus nerve
E. arcuate nucleus
Question 2 A B C D E
Leptin receptors are most abundant in which of the following hypothalamic nuclei?
A. paraventricular
B. periventricular
C. preoptic/anterior
D. ventromedial
E. arcuate
Question 3 A B C D E
A successful new diet drug might have which of the following effects in the hypothalamus?
A. Activates NPY receptors
B. Blocks αMSH receptors
C. Activates leptin receptors
D. Stimulates AGRP synthesis
E. Reduces CART synthesis
Question 4 A B C D E
In which of the following hypothalamic nuclei is the body weight set point best encoded?
A. arcuate nucleus
B. periventricular nucleus
C. supraoptic nucleus
D. preoptic anterior nucleus
E. suprachiasmatic nucleus
Question 5 A B C D E
Which of the following functions is performed by the paraventricular nucleus in the hypothalamic
circuitry of satiety?
A. integrates humoral signals of satiety
B. integrates emotional signals of satiety
C. establishes tone in the central autonomic network
D. integrates hormonal signals of satiety
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter04.html 6/7

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Central Control of Feeding Behavior (Section 4, Chapter 4) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
E. measures and encodes the caloric set point
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter04.html 7/7



1/7/25, 10:08 AM Central Control of the Autonomic Nervous System and Thermoregulation (Section 4, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 4: Homeostasis and Higher Brain Functions
Search
Chapter 3: Central Control of the Autonomic Nervous System and Thermoregulation
Patrick Dougherty, Ph.D., Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, MD Anderson Cancer Center
Last Review 20 Oct 2020
PLAY Recalling Figure 11.2 from Section I
Preganglionic Postganglionic
Nerve Nerve
ACh NE
Sympathetic
Ganglion
Preganglionic Postganglionic
Nerve Nerve
ACh
ACh
Sympathetic
Ganglion
Preganglionic Postganglionic
Nerve ACh Nerve
ACh
Parasympathetic Ganglion
Figure 3.1
Overview of the Central Autonomic Network
3.1 Defining the Central Autonomic Network
Because many students have been led to believe that the autonomic nervous system is relatively primitive, most have concluded
that normal regulation of this system occurs at ganglionic, or at best, spinal levels. Thus, they are often quite surprised to discover
that dysfunction of the brain is typically accompanied by autonomic dysfunction that can be life-threatening. For example, patients
with spinal transection can have severe hypertensive crises provoked by a full bladder, impacted colon, or even stroking of the skin.
This is not to say that the spinal cord and autonomic ganglia do not play important roles in autonomic regulation. But, that the
organization of autonomic output takes place at supraspinal levels.
Extensive interconnection occurs between sites receiving visceral inputs and that control autonomic efferent outputs, between sites
for the control of sympathetic versus parasympathetic nervous system output, and between sites for autonomic control and
somatic, endocrine and limbic circuitry. Collectively, this set of interconnections is termed the central autonomic network.
3.2 Structure of the Central Autonomic Network
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter03.html 1/9

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Central Control of the Autonomic Nervous System and Thermoregulation (Section 4, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic…
The central autonomic network is composed of both hypothalamic and extra-hypothalamic nuclei. Some of these sites regulate
sympathetic outflow whereas others regulate parasympathetic outflow. This structure was first revealed in lesion studies that
revealed multisynaptic connections descending from the hypothalamus and midbrain to preganglionic neurons in the brainstem and
spinal cord. Similarly, connections from various limbic brain structures, most especially the amygdala, through the hypothalamus
have been demonstrated. The net result of this network in full operation is the induction of autonomic responses to visceral and
somatic stress stimuli, such as elevated heart rate and blood pressure with the onset of pain. Alternatively, chronic hypertension in
type “A” or stressed individuals represents increased central autonomic outflow in response to increased limbic system input.
Hierarchy in the autonomic network results in the loops from the brainstem to spinal cord being responsible for rapid short-term
regulation of the autonomic nervous system, hypothalamic-brainstem-spinal cord pathways serving longer-term, metabolic and
reproductive regulation, and finally limbic system-hypothalamic-brainstem-spinal cord loops serving anticipatory autonomic
regulation.
1. Hypothalamic Structures. The single most important hypothalamic nucleus of the central autonomic network is the
paraventricular nucleus (PVN). The PVN has two morphological classes of neurons that fall into three functional categories.
The first morphological class is comprised of magnocellular (big) neurons. These neurons contain vasopressin and oxytocin
and project their axons into the posterior pituitary where these hormones are released directly into the blood stream. The
second morphological class is comprised of parvocellular (small) neurons. The parvocellular PVN neurons also include a
neuroendocrine-related functional subset that project to the median eminence and secrete releasing hormones into the
hypophyseal portal blood stream for control of anterior pituitary hormone secretion. More on these two functional groups will
be covered in the next chapter. Finally, a group of parvocellular neurons comprise the third functional group of PVN neurons
with these involved in central autonomic control.
There are three types of pre-autonomic parvocellular neurons (Types A, B and C) separable based on anatomical and
physiological criteria, as well as based on subnuclear location within the PVN. Pre-autonomic PVN neurons project directly
onto preganglionic autonomic neurons in the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, the autonomic relay nuclei of the brainstem
(A5, rostral ventral lateral medulla) and even directly to the intermediolateral spinal columns. These projections descend
ipsilaterally through the brainstem and spinal cord with four points of decussation (supramammillary, pontine tegmentum,
commissural part of the nucleus of the solitary tract (the major one), lamina X of the spinal cord) so that ultimately
innervation is bilateral but with an ipsilateral dominance. Thus, the PVN, unlike any other brain site, has direct influence over
both sympathetic and parasympathetic outflow. Furthermore, the PVN receives direct sympathetic and parasympathetic
afferent inputs from trigeminal pars caudalis (sympathetic) and the nucleus of the solitary tract (parasympathetic). The PVN
therefore is the only brain site in a closed efferent-afferent reflex loop with both the sympathetic and parasympathetic
nervous systems.
Other hypothalamic nuclei in the central autonomic network include the dorsomedial nucleus, the lateral hypothalamic area,
the posterior hypothalamic nucleus and the mammillary nucleus. These nuclei send and receive projections from the PVN, the
dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, the central gray matter, the parabrachial nucleus, the nucleus of the solitary tract, the
lateral and ventral medulla and the intermediolateral spinal columns. The lateral hypothalamus is especially involved in
cardiovascular control as well as in control of feeding, satiety and insulin release.
Amygdala, hippocampus & septal nucleus
cingulate, orbitofrontal, insular and rhinal Cx
Anterior Posterior
hypothalamus hypothalamus
Lateral Mammillary
hypothalamus nucleus Limbic connections
Paraventricular Nucleus
Hypothalamic connections
Brain stem and
Dorsal motor Rostral, ventral
peripheral connections
nucleus of lateral
the vagus medulla(A5) SHOW ALL
Nucleus of Raphe nuclei Trigeminal
the solitary parabrachial n. pars
tract central gray caudalis
Parasympathetic Spinal Spinal Sympathetic
outflow to IML IML outflow to
tissues column column tissues
Figure 3.2
Schematic for the Central Autonomic Network
2. Extra-hypothalamic Structures. Numerous brain structures were itemized above as innervation targets of the hypothalamic
structures of the central autonomic network. These extra-hypothalamic sites can be roughly divided into those associated with
control of the two components of the autonomic nervous system. The sites associated with control of sympathetic outflow
include the norepinephrine-containing neurons of the dorsal mesencephalon (locus ceruleus) and the rostral and caudal
ventrolateral medulla (the A5 and A1 regions) and the serotonin-containing neurons of the pontine and medullary raphe
nuclei. The extra-hypothalamic sites associated with control of parasympathetic outflow include the central nucleus of the
amygdala, the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, the nucleus ambiguous, the raphe nuclei, the periaqueductal gray, and the
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter03.html 2/9

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Central Control of the Autonomic Nervous System and Thermoregulation (Section 4, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic…
parabrachial nucleus. Finally, limbic cortices, including the cingulate, orbitofrontal, insular and rhinal cortices, and the
hippocampus influence both sets of autonomic outflow.
3.3 Circuitry for Hypothalamic Control of the Autonomic Nervous System
The hypothalamus is interconnected with the remainder of the central autonomic network by way of three major pathways: the
dorsal longitudinal fasciculus, the medial forebrain bundle, and the mammillotegmental tract.
The principal pathway of the hypothalamus in the central autonomic network is the dorsal longitudinal fasciculus (DLF). The DLF
originates in the region of the paraventricular nucleus and descends along the most medial aspect of the third ventricle through the
periaqueductal gray and mesencephalic reticular formation. The DLF continues caudally in the midline near the floor of the fourth
ventricle until the closure of the open medulla where it becomes internalized near the central canal remnant. This position leaves
the DLF in ideal position to innervate the periaqueductal gray, the parabrachial nucleus, the mesencephalic raphe nuclei, and the
locus ceruleus rostrally and the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, the nucleus ambiguous and the medullary raphe more caudally.
The centralized location of the DLF as it continues into the lower medulla and then the spinal cord renders it in perfect location to
innervate the parasympathetic and sympathetic neurons of the intermediolateral spinal cord. As detailed above the DLF projections
are bilateral, though with an ipsilateral dominance, due to several points of decussation. Afferent inputs from the periaqueductal
gray, parabrachial nucleus, and the locus ceruleus ascend through the DLF to the hypothalamus.
The medial forebrain bundle (MFB) is the primary route for input to the hypothalamus from the septal nuclei and basal forebrain
limbic structures. Inputs from the amygdala and hippocampus, though first arriving to the hypothalamus by way of the stria
terminalis, ventral amygdalofugal pathway, and fornix, ultimately join with the MFB and thereby gain access to the paraventricular
nucleus. The MFB also has fibers from the paraventricular nucleus that descend to innervate essentially the same nuclei as that by
the DLF. Visceral afferents from the nucleus of the solitary tract ascend from the brainstem into the hypothalamus by way of the
MFB. The MFB, like the DLF has several points of decussation so that there is input to bilateral structures but with an ipsilateral
dominance.
The mammillotegmental tract is less prominent than either the DLF or MFB nevertheless, this pathway that originates in the
mammillary nucleus sends projections into the mesencephalic and pontine reticular formations that in turn influence the activity of
the brainstem autonomic nuclei listed above.
Somatic afferents ascend to the hypothalamus by way of the spinohypothalamic tract.
SHOW ALL Medial forebrain bundle (MFB)
Dorsal longitudinal fasciculus (DLF)
Mammillotegmental
tract
Figure 3.3
Circuitry for hypothalamic control of the autonomic nervous system
3.4 Disorders of the Central Autonomic Control
1. Autonomic Dysreflexia is a condition observed in about 85 percent of patients following spinal cord injury above C6.
Exaggerated autonomic reflexes, especially sudden dramatic increases in blood pressure are provoked by inappropriate
stimuli, such as pressure on the bladder.
2. Riley-Day Syndrome (familial dysautonomia) is an autosomal recessive disorder in Ashkenazi Jews associated with decreased
tearing and sensitivity to pain and absent fungiform papillae on the tongue. Episodic abdominal crises and fever are very
common as is orthostatic hypotension.
3. Shy-Drager Syndrome is a progressive degenerative condition of unknown origin affecting cells of the central autonomic
network in the brainstem, intermediolateral cell column, locus ceruleus, dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, and other nuclei
including the substantia nigra caudate nucleus, and cerebellum. The presence of Lewy bodies in many of these areas suggests
this syndrome may be related to Parkinson’s disease, in which there is also often a high degree of autonomic dysfunction. The
hallmark sign is profound orthostatic hypotension without a compensatory increase in heart rate.
4. Sudden Infant Death Syndrome is thought to be a developmental defect in the central autonomic network of the brainstem
involved with respiratory drive. An abrupt increase in facial skin temperature related to the onset of periods of apnea suggest
there may be a broader developmental defect of central autonomic control.
5. Horner’s Syndrome typically results following damage to the dorsolateral pons or medulla and is characterized by a profound
disturbance in sympathetic nervous system function. A common cause of this type of lesion is thrombosis of the posterior
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter03.html 3/9

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Central Control of the Autonomic Nervous System and Thermoregulation (Section 4, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic…
inferior cerebellar artery or following damage to the white matter of the cervical spinal cord where the hypothalamic-spinal
tract descends. The most common signs in Horner’s syndrome are ipsilateral miosis, ptosis, anhidrosis and erythema.
3.5 The Central Autonomic Network and Control of Body Temperature
As noted above, the central autonomic network consists of three hierarchically ordered circuits or loops: the short-term brainstem-
spinal loops, and the limbic brain-hypothalamic-brainstem-spinal cord loops mediating anticipatory and stress responses, and the
intermediate length hypothalamic-brainstem-spinal cord loops mediating longer-term autonomic reflexes. Here we focus on this
later loop in its role in thermoregulation. A later chapter will focus on this loop in the regulation of feeding.
The Hypothalamic Basis of Temperature Set-Point. Regulation of core temperature is essential because most of the metabolic
processes necessary for life are strongly temperature-dependent. The normal body temperature set-point is primarily determined
by the activity of neurons in the medial preoptic and anterior hypothalamic nuclei as well as by neurons in the adjoining medial
septal nuclei. Collectively this region is often termed the preoptic anterior hypothalamus (POAH). The second region that also plays
a critical, though subservient role to the POAH, in temperature regulation is the posterior hypothalamus.
3.6 Temperature-Sensitive Neurons
It was previously mentioned that the hypothalamus is one of the few brain areas where CNS neurons reside that are themselves
directly sensitive to physical or chemical variables such as temperature, plasma osmolality, plasma glucose, and various hormones.
The POAH has three types of neurons involved in determining the temperature set-point, warm-sensitive neurons, cold-sensitive
neurons, and temperature-insensitive neurons, that are defined by changes in discharge rate following local warming or cooling of
the POAH. Warm-sensitive neurons comprise about 30% of the neuronal pool in the POAH. These neurons have a firing rate versus
temperature as shown in Figure 3.4. Change in temperature below 37 degrees has little effect on discharge rate. However, as
temperature rises above 37 degrees the discharge rate of these neurons increases dramatically. Activation of warm-sensitive
neurons results in an activation of neurons in the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) and lateral hypothalamus that result in heightened
parasympathetic outflow to promote the dissipation of heat. Cold-sensitive neurons which are only about 5% of the cell population
in the POAH, but more prevalent in the posterior hypothalamic nucleus, have discharge properties opposite that of warm-sensitive
neurons. The cold-sensitive neurons show low rates of discharge at temperatures above 37 degrees, but increase firing rate steeply
as temperature is lowered below 37 degrees. Increased discharges in cold-sensitive neurons results in activation of neurons in the
PVN and the posterior hypothalamus that increase sympathetic outflow to promote the generation and conservation of heat. The
relative concentration of warm-sensitive neurons in the POAH that promote heat loss and of cold-sensitive neurons in the posterior
hypothalamus that promote heat generation has resulted in the POAH often being termed as the heat dissipation center and the
posterior hypothalamus being labeled as the heat generation/conservation center. The final group of neurons found in the POAH and
posterior hypothalamus is the temperature-insensitive neurons. These are by-far the most numerous of the neurons in these nuclei,
comprising greater than 60 percent of those in the POAH. Although by definition not sensitive to changes in temperature these
neurons play a crucial role in heat generation/conservation as discussed below.
W
Cutaneous & Spinal
Warm Receptors
C
Cutaneous & Spinal
Cool Receptors I
Legend:
W = Warm sensitive neuron
C = Cold sensitive neuron
I = Temperature-insensitive neuron
Figure 3.4
Neuronal Mechanism for Body Temperature Set-Point. Click the octagon shapes.
3.7 Neural Mechanisms of Temperature Set-Point
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter03.html 4/9

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Central Control of the Autonomic Nervous System and Thermoregulation (Section 4, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic…
The master circuit in regulation of body temperature is heat dissipation. The warm-sensitive neurons of the POAH have intrinsic
membrane receptors that are sensitive to changes in brain and blood temperature above 37 degrees. These are non-specific cation
channels that very likely are related to the vanilloid (capsaicin-sensitive) family of thermoreceptors. Warm-sensitive neurons also
receive excitatory inputs from cutaneous and spinal thermoreceptors. As illustrated in Figure 3.4, inputs from cutaneous receptors
induce a leftward bias in the firing rates of hypothalamic warm-sensitive neurons, so that baseline discharge rate is greatly
elevated. Interestingly, though the firing rate of these cells continues to increase with increases in body temperature, the slope of
this increase is reduced. Thus, the drive to dissipate heat is actively driven by inputs from thermal receptors. It is not clear that
such is the case for heat generation and conservation. Cool-sensitive neurons do not appear to have intrinsic temperature-sensitive
receptors. Rather, the increase in discharge observed in cool-sensitive cells with cooling results from the decreases in discharge of
the warm-sensitive neurons and subsequent disinhibition so that the cool-sensitive neurons are now driven by tonic inputs from the
thermal-insensitive neurons. Thus, the temperature set-point is principally a function of activity in warm-sensitive neurons of the
POAH. The short-term effects of output from both warm- and cool-sensitive neurons on body temperature occur as a result of
changes in autonomic tone to cutaneous arterioles and so the amount of cutaneous blood flow. Changes in sympathetic outflow to
sweat glands and adipose tissue provide additional targets used for heat dissipation and generation. Longer-term effects of these
groups of neurons in response to sustained changes in environmental temperature include the induction of behavioral and
neuroendocrine responses to changes in environmental temperature.
RESET To PVN & lateral hypothalamus
increased parasympathetic outflow
W
Pyrogens
TNF,IFN, IL-1, PGE
W
Cutaneous & Spinal
Warm Receptors
C
Cutaneous & Spinal
Cool Receptors I
Legend:
W = Warm sensitive neuron
C = Cold sensitive neuron
I = Temperature-insensitive neuron
Figure 3.5
Mechanism of Change in for Body Temperature Set-Point During Fever. Click the octagon shapes.
3.8 Disorders of Thermoregulation
Fever. The statement above highlights well the fact that fever has been a scourge battled by physicians since antiquity. However,
recently fever has become recognized as in fact only one in a constellation of physiological adaptations that take place during
infection referred to as the “sickness” or “acute phase response”. The sickness response includes behavioral, cognitive, metabolic,
and neuroendocrine adaptations that are all geared to make the body less hospitable to pathogens and most primed for optimizing
immunological defenses. Thus, fever is initiated because most bacteria proliferate poorly at temperatures above 39 degrees,
whereas the function of lymphoid cells is optimal at this temperature. Fever is initiated during infection following the activation of
macrophages and the subsequent synthesis and release of endogenous pyrogenic substances including interleukin-1 (IL-1), tumor
necrosis factor (TNF), interleukin-6 (IL-6), and the interferons (IFN). These pyrogens enter the blood stream and exert their effects
in the CNS at the organum vasculosum of the lamina terminalis (OVLT). As discussed in the previous section, the OVLT is one of
several sites in the CNS where the blood brain barrier is relatively permeable and so allows the brain to “taste” the internal milieu
of the body. The endothelial cells of the OVLT have receptors for the endogenous pyrogens that when activated cause both the
synthesis and release into the CNS of prostanoids, in particular, prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) as well as the synthesis and release within
the CNS of IL-1, IL-6, TNF, and IFN. PGE2 gains access to the warm-sensitive cells of the POAH immediately adjacent to the OVLT
where it binds to surface receptors and induces increases in cellular levels of cyclic AMP. The increased cAMP activates the protein
kinase A system resulting in reduced excitability of the warm-sensitive neurons and lowering of their discharge rate. This allows the
discharge rate of the cool-sensitive neurons to increase thus, establishing a new, higher temperature set-point. The use of
antipyretics such as aspirin and indomethacin counteracts fever by interrupting the synthesis of PGE2 through antagonism of the
cyclooxygenase enzyme system in the endothelium of the OVLT.
“Humanity has but three great enemies: fever, famine, and
war, and of these by far the greatest, by far the most
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter03.html 5/9

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Central Control of the Autonomic Nervous System and Thermoregulation (Section 4, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic…
terrible, is fever.”
- William Osler
Release of Pro-Inflammatory
Cytokines: IL-1, TNF, IFN, IL-6
Increased PGE2 suppresses
warm cells which disinhibits
cool cells. Thermal set-point
is raised.
Infection
Proliferation of immune cells
is opti mized while bacterial growth
is slowed. Infection resolves.
Elevated set-point causes shivering
and warmth-seeking behavior until
core achieves new set point.
Figure 3.6
Mechanism of Change in for Body Temperature Set-Point During Fever
Heat Exhaustion. Prolonged exposure or over-exertion in very warm environments can result in an excessive loss of fluids and
electrolytes resulting in muscle cramps, dizziness, vomiting and fainting. In extreme conditions a degree of hypotension can
develop. However, heat exhaustion is distinguished from heat stroke in that the body temperature set-point remains well regulated
and the mechanisms mediating heat dissipation are intact. Thus, the skin is cool and moist and body temperature is normal or
slightly below normal. Rest and replacement of fluids and electrolytes quickly remedy this condition.
Heat Stroke. If heat exhaustion is not remedied it can progress to heat stroke. Extreme hypotension will result in a drop in
cutaneous blood flow and decrease in perspiration. Core temperature will subsequently rise. If this rise is too severe the brain’s
normal functioning can be interrupted and control of the temperature set-point fails. This results in further deterioration of the heat
dissipation mechanisms and allows core temperature to rise further so that tissue damage ensues which can lead to coma and then
death. This heat stroke patient is in a medical emergency and requires urgent lowering of core temperature by fluid and electrolyte
replacement. Hepatic damage is common in this condition and jaundice may develop 1 to 2 days after admission. Acute oliguric
renal failure may occur. The development of coma and disseminated intravascular coagulation are very poor prognostic factors.
Malignant Hyperthermia is a group of inherited disorders characterized by sudden and extreme increases in core temperature
following exposure to gaseous anesthetics including halothane, methoxyflurane, cyclopropane, or ethyl ether; or following exposure
to muscle relaxants, particularly succinylcholine. These agents provoke an excessive release of calcium from the muscle
sarcoplasmic reticulum resulting in activation of myosin ATPase and so excess heat generation. One form of the disease is inherited
in an autosomal dominant fashion while a second is inherited in a recessive manner in boys and less often in girls that also have a
number of other congenital abnormalities that comprise King’s syndrome. Malignant hyperthermia also sometimes occurs with other
myopathies such as myotonia congenita and Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy. Some patients show an elevated creatinine
phosphokinase, but most are normal between attacks. Biopsied muscle will show abnormal contraction on exposure to caffeine or
gas anesthetic, but this is obviously a clumsy manner to screen for the condition. Careful history of surgical complications in
relatives and identification of other contributing conditions is the best way to detect and prevent malignant hyperthermia.
Occurrence is a medical emergency and requires immediate institution of the treatment protocol prescribed by the American
Society of Anesthesiologists. The surgery and gas anesthetic is stopped, all tubing from the anesthetic devices are changed, and
external cooling is initiated. One hundred percent oxygen, 1-2mg/kg sodium bicarbonate, and 1mg/kg dantrolene sodium are
given. Drugs for cardiac arrhythmias are given as needed.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter03.html 6/9

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Central Control of the Autonomic Nervous System and Thermoregulation (Section 4, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic…
Heat Exhaustion
heat
cutaneous excess
ccoolldd,, ssttrreessss,,
vasodilation sweating
mmeettaabboolliicc ddiisseeaassee,,
hypovolemia ddrruuggss,, bbuurrnnss,, aaggee
cardiac blood
output pressure
CCNNSS iimmppaaiirrmmeenntt
iinnssuuffffiicciieenntt iinnaaddeeqquuaattee insufficient heat
hheeaatt lloossss sseett--ppooiinntt production
rreegguullaattiioonn
ccoorree
ttiissssuuee nnoott
tteemmppeerraattuurree core temperature
ffuunnccttiioonniinngg
ccoommaa
Heat Shock Hypothermia
ddeeaatthh
Figure 3.7
Emergencies of Thermoregulation
Hypothermia is defined as a core temperature of 35 degrees or lower and represents a potential medical emergency. Accidental
hypothermia is common in winter following prolonged exposure, not necessarily to excessively low temperatures, and may
accompany sepsis, hypothyroidism, pituitary or adrenal insufficiency, hypoglycemia, myocardial infarction and the ingestion of
drugs - particularly alcohol. However, hypothermia can also occur in certain medical conditions without exposure, including
congestive heart failure, uremia, drug overdose, acute respiratory failure, and hypoglycemia. Most of these patients are elderly.
Patients presenting with a core temperature of less than 26.7 degrees are usually unconscious, miotic, bradypneic, bradycardic, and
hypotensive with generalized edema. At core temperatures below 25 degrees patients are in coma, areflexic and may appear in
rigor mortis. Treatment requires establishing an airway and providing oxygen. Blood volume can be expanded with warmed glucose
while the blood gases and cardiac rhythm are carefully monitored. External warming is applied to the thorax only so that the limbs
remain vasoconstricted to prevent a precipitous drop in blood pressure.
3.9 Summary
Several forebrain, diencephalic and brainstem structures are interconnected to organize the output of the autonomic nervous
system. Collectively, this is referred to as the central autonomic network and is further organized into a hierarchy of functional
loops.
The hypothalamus is the key brain site for central control of the autonomic nervous system, and the paraventricular nucleus is the
key hypothalamic site for this control. The major pathway from the hypothalamus for autonomic control is the dorsal longitudinal
fasciculus.
Regulation of body temperature is one example of hypothalamic control of brainstem and spinal autonomic nuclei related to longer-
term autonomic reflexes. Thermoregulation is principally a function of warm-sensitive neurons of the preoptic anterior
hypothalamus that directly control the dissipation of heat.
Fever is the most common disorder of thermoregulation. Fever is following the release of endogenous pyrogens that elevate the
level of prostaglandin E2 in the preoptic anterior hypothalamus, which causes a decrease in activity of warm-sensitive neurons and
subsequent disinhibition of cool-sensitive neurons.
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
The most important hypothalamic nucleus for central regulation of the autonomic nervous system is
the:
A. periventricular nucleus
B. paraventricular nucleus
C. anterior nucleus
D. posterior nucleus
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter03.html 7/9

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Central Control of the Autonomic Nervous System and Thermoregulation (Section 4, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic…
E. ventromedial nucleus
Question 2 A B C D E
In which of the following hypothalamic nuclei is the body temperature set-point encoded by
temperature sensitive neurons?
A. ventromedial nucleus
B. dorsomedial nucleus
C. arcuate nucleus
D. paraventricular nucleus
E. preoptic anterior nucleus
Question 3 A B C D E
Which hypothalamic nucleus is considered as the heat generation/conservation center?
A. preoptic anterior nucleus
B. paraventricular nucleus
C. posterior nucleus
D. supraoptic nucleus
E. arcuate nucleus
Question 4 A B C D E
The principal pathway of the central autonomic network is the:
A. medial forebrain bundle
B. stria terminalis
C. dorsal longitudinal fasciculus
D. mammillotegmental tract
E. spinohypothalamic tract
Question 5 A B C D E
Which of the following events best accounts for the generation of fever?
A. Cool-sensitive neurons are inhibited by IL-1 and reduce heat loss.
B. Warm-sensitive neurons are excited by prostaglandin E2 and increase heat gain.
C. Temperative insensitive neurons increase the activity of disinhibited cool sensitive
neurons.
D. Neurons in the organum vasculosum inhibit warm sensitive neurons and stimulate cool
sensitive neurons
E. Pyrogens constrict blood vessels
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter03.html 8/9

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Central Control of the Autonomic Nervous System and Thermoregulation (Section 4, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic…
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter03.html 9/9



1/7/25, 10:08 AM Hypothalamic Control of Pituitary Hormone (Section 4, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscienc…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 4: Homeostasis and Higher Brain Functions
Search
Chapter 2: Hypothalamic Control of Pituitary Hormone
Patrick Dougherty, Ph.D., Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, MD Anderson Cancer Center
Last Review 20 Oct 2020
PLAY
Figure 2.1
Circuitry of the Hypothalamic-neurohypophyseal tract.
The Neuroendocrine System represents the second, and last, major efferent system of the hypothalamus that we will consider in
detail in this section. The third efferent system, the limbic system, will be covered in a later chapter. The information transfer in the
hypothalamic-neuroendocrine pathways are unique in that they are largely blood borne as opposed to neurally mediated.
Traditionally, the neuroendocrine system has been considered in two parts, that part dealing with the posterior pituitary, or
neurohypophysis; and that part dealing with the anterior pituitary, or adenohypophysis. However, it is increasingly clear that the
immune system also has such an important effect on neuroendocrine regulation that it must now also be considered as a special
“diffuse” neuroendocrine component.
2.1 The Posterior Pituitary
The posterior pituitary is often termed the neurohypophysis because the hormones of this part of the pituitary are released directly
from the axonal endings of their source neurons into the circulation (Figure 2.1). The hypothalamic nuclei in which the cell bodies of
these neurons reside are the supraoptic and the paraventricular nuclei. As we discussed in the previous chapter, both nuclei are
composed of multiple cell types, but it is only the large magnocellular neurons that produce the hormones and that send axons into
the neurohypophysis. The pathway from the hypothalamus to the posterior pituitary is called the hypothalamo-neurohypophyseal
tract. It is along this tract that the hormones oxytocin and vasopressin (also called antidiuretic hormone or ADH) are cleaved from
their prohormones and prepared for release in vesicles along with their co-peptides neurophysin I (oxytocin) and neurophysin II
(vasopressin). Although the two amino acid peptides (nonapeptides) only differ by two amino acids, a given neuron produces only
one or the other type of hormone at a time, but not both simultaneously. Release of hormones into the circulation of the posterior
pituitary occurs following various neural stimuli and so the functions of this portion of the neuroendocrine system is characterized
by reflexes with neural input and hormonal output.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter02.html 1/10

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Hypothalamic Control of Pituitary Hormone (Section 4, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscienc…
PLAY PLAY
Figure 2.2
Schematic of oxytocin roles in the milk let-down, parturition,
and sperm transport reflexes.
Oxytocin. Oxytocin has no diurnal rhythm but is released in three reflexes following the influence of several different types of
stimuli.
1. In the milk let-down reflex (Figure 2.2) the tactile stimuli applied to the breast by the suckling infant are transmitted to the
hypothalamus by the spinohypothalamic tract directly to the preoptic and paraventricular nuclei to excite the magnocellular
neurons and so provoke the release of hormone into the circulation. Oxytocin travels through the bloodstream acts on the
mammary glands to cause milk release so that about 13 seconds later milk enters the ducts of the gland. Other non-tactile
stimuli can also provoke this reflex including the sound of the baby crying, visual cues, anxiety, and other stimuli that increase
hypothalamic sympathetic tone.
2. During parturition oxytocin induces powerful contractions of the uterine myometrium (Figure 2.2). Parturition itself is not
induced by oxytocin, but the strength and frequency of the contractions of labor are enhanced by oxytocin. Pressure on the
cervix or uterine wall are transmitted to the hypothalamus by the spinohypothalamic tract inducing hormone release as above
which enters the blood acting to enhance contractions and so closing a positive feedback loop. Once the baby is born the
cervical pressure is released and contractions cease. Synthetic oxytocin (Pitocin) is often given to increase uterine tone and
control uterine bleeding following birth and after some gynecological procedures.
3. Oxytocin also produces contractions of the uterine myometrium and smooth muscles of the male and female reproductive
tract that are important for sperm transport. The stimuli in this reflex are inputs from CNS sympathetic pathways activated
with sexual activity.
Vasopressin. Vasopressin, also known as arginine vasopressin (AVP), acts on V2 receptors on the contraluminal surface of the
distal tubular epithelium primarily in the collecting duct of the kidney to increase permeability and allow reabsorption of water and
electrolytes into the circulation (Figure 2.3). Vasopressin has a diurnal peak late at night and early in the morning and a trough in
the mid-afternoon. Sensors for plasma osmolality control the evoked secretion of vasopressin by magnocellular neurons in the
paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei of the hypothalamus. The magnocellular neurons have intrinsic osmoreceptors in their plasma
membrane and also receive afferent inputs from osmo-sensitive neurons in the organum vasculosum of the lamina terminalis.
Sensors in the subfornical organ for angiotensin II also stimulate the release of vasopressin. Angiotensin II in the blood is elevated
following the release of renin from the kidney in response to a decrease in blood pressure. Finally, the carotid and aortic arch bodies
that signal the hypothalamus via the vagus and glossopharyngeal nerves via relay in the solitary nucleus also detect a decrease in
blood oxygen or pressure and promote the release of vasopressin.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter02.html 2/10

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Hypothalamic Control of Pituitary Hormone (Section 4, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscienc…
OSMOLALITY
ANGIOTENSIN II
BP O2 Subfornical organ
Medial forebrain
bundle
Organum
vasculosum
kidney
retains
water
Vasopressin
(Neurophysin II)
Figure 2.3
Schematic of vasopressin roles in plasma osmolality control reflexes
Disorders of the Posterior Pituitary
1. Oxytocin: No disorders have been acknowledged.
2. Diabetes Insipidus results due to insufficient vasopressin secretion in response to normal physiologic stimuli (central or
neurogenic diabetes insipidus) or due to failure of the kidney to respond to vasopressin (nephrogenic diabetes insipidus).
Neoplastic or infiltrative lesions, pituitary or hypothalamic surgery, severe head injuries, and idiopathic causes in that order
most frequently cause central diabetes insipidus. The second two may remit spontaneously due to revascularization of the
hypothalamo-pituitary stalk. The symptoms include large amounts of dilute urine, dehydration and thirst. Treatment is by
hormone replacement.
3. Syndrome of Inappropriate AVP Secretion (SIADH) is associated with some central nervous system disorders including
trauma, encephalitis, cerebrovascular accident and acute psychosis. Some drugs, including vincristine, some general
anesthetics and antidepressants release or potentiate the effects of vasopressin. Elevated vasopressin also occurs in some
tumors following ectopic synthesis and release. Clinical signs include hyponatremia, edema, hypovolemic features,
hyperosmolality of the urine, and hyperlipidemia. Treatment requires fluid restriction and then identification and treatment of
the underlying cause.
2.2 The Anterior Pituitary
PLAY
Paraventricular
nucleus Arcuate nucleus
Tubero-infundibular
tract
Supraoptic
nucleus
Superior hypophyseal
artery
Hypophyseal-portal vein
vein Neurohypophysis
Adenohypophysis
Figure 2.4
Schematic of the Tuberoinfundibular tract.
The Anterior Pituitary is an endocrine gland controlled by the hypothalamus in several fundamentally different fashions than is the
posterior pituitary. None of the six major hormones released by the adenohypophysis are of hypothalamic origin, rather all are
synthesized in cells embryonically derived from Rathke’s pouch in the anterior pituitary itself and released directly into the blood
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter02.html 3/10

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Hypothalamic Control of Pituitary Hormone (Section 4, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscienc…
stream. Releasing- and release-inhibiting hormones that are synthesized in the arcuate, paraventricular, periventricular and
supraoptic nuclei of the hypothalamus control anterior pituitary hormone secretion. Parvocellular neurons in these nuclei send their
axons into the tuberoinfundibular tract and terminate on a capillary bed of the superior hypophyseal arteries located around the
base of the median eminence. A given parvocellular neuron may release one or more releasing factor into these capillaries that
coalesce into 6 to 10 small straight veins that form the hypophyseal-portal blood circulation which descends along the infundibular
stalk and forms a second capillary plexus around the anterior pituitary. The releasing-hormones gain access to the five distinct
types of target cells in the anterior pituitary from this plexus and stimulate anterior pituitary hormone release back into the
capillary bed that then drains into the systemic circulation and transports the hormones to peripheral target tissues. The target
tissues are stimulated to produce final mediator hormones that induce the physiological changes in peripheral tissues typical of
each hormone.
INDIRECT LONG LOOP FEEDBACK
DIRECT LONG LOOP FEEDBACK
SHORT LOOP FEEDBACK
hypothalamic release
ULTRA-SHORT LOOP FEEDBACK hormone
SHOW ALL
Circulating hypophyseal
hormone (eg ACTH)
+
Target gland
Figure 2.5
Schematic of feedback control loops regulating the release of hypothalamic
releasing factors and anterior pituitary hormones.
Control of secretion of the releasing factors, pituitary hormones and peripheral endocrine hormones is tightly inter-related in a set
of feedback loops (Figure 2.5). The ultra-short feedback loop is mediated by the hypothalamic releasing factors limiting their
own release by a type of autocrine effect on targets in the hypothalamus. Inhibition of releasing-factor secretion by pituitary
hormones comprises short loop feedback. Finally, peripheral hormone inhibition of pituitary secretion comprises the direct long-
loop feedback and inhibition on hypothalamic secretion of the releasing factors comprises the indirect long-loop feedback.
Figure 2.6
Detailed schematic of control loops in the
Growth Hormone pathway.
Growth hormone (GH) is secreted from somatotrophs, which comprise about half of the cells in the anterior pituitary (Figure
2.6). GH release is characteristically pulsatile being very low most of the day except following meals, exercise, during slow wave
sleep, and at other individualized intervals. GH is necessary for normal linear growth and greatly influences intermediary
metabolism by way of its induction of somatomedins (insulin-like growth factors, IGF) from target tissues most notably including
the liver, chondrocytes, kidney, muscle, pituitary and the gastrointestinal tract. The hypothalamic regulation of GH secretion is
illustrative of the mechanisms that govern all hormones of the anterior pituitary. Release is controlled by Growth hormone releasing
hormone (GHRH) a 39 amino acid peptide that is primarily synthesized in the arcuate nucleus. GHRH release from the arcuate
nucleus is stimulated by inputs from other brain regions using the neurotransmitters norepinephrine, dopamine, serotonin,
acetylcholine and the enkephalins. Release of GHRH is inhibited by somatostatin and very importantly, by the actions of GH and
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter02.html 4/10

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Hypothalamic Control of Pituitary Hormone (Section 4, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscienc…
IGF. The regulation of GHRH release by somatostatin is an example of ultra-short loop feedback, regulation of release by GH is an
example of short-loop feedback, and regulation by IGF is an example of indirect long loop feedback.
Prolactin. Prolactin is necessary for lactation and is secreted by pituitary lactotrophs, which constitute 15 to 20 percent of the cells
in the normal pituitary. Control of prolactin secretion by the hypothalamus is unique to that of the other anterior pituitary hormones
in that under normal circumstances it is restrained and not elicited. Dopamine released from the arcuate and paraventricular nuclei
acts on D2 receptors to increase adenyl cyclase in lactotrophs and inhibit prolactin release. Increases in plasma prolactin induces
increased levels of dopamine in the arcuate and paraventricular nuclei and so establishes short-loop feedback.
Luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone control the gonads in men and women. These hormones are secreted
by the gonadotrophs, which comprise about 10 percent of the adenohypophysis. Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) is
the hypothalamic factor that controls release of the gonadotrophs and primarily is released itself from the arcuate nucleus.
Feedback regulation of LHRH is provided by low levels of estrogen in females and by testosterone in males.
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) is secreted by about 5 percent of the cells in the pituitary called thyrotrophs and regulates
thyroid function. Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) is found in the highest concentrations in the medial division of the
paraventricular nucleus. The thyroid hormones thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3) inhibit TSH production and release at the
level of the pituitary (direct long loop) and inhibit the release of TRH at the level of the hypothalamus (indirect long loop).
Adrenocorticotropin (ACTH) controls glucocorticoid function of the adrenal cortex. ACTH is produced by the corticotrophs that
comprise the remaining 15 percent of pituitary cells as part of the larger pro-opiomelanocortin gene product from which γ-
melanocyte stimulating hormone and ß-endorphin are also derived. ACTH is released in pulses with an overall circadian rhythm
peak at around 4 AM and a trough in the early evening. Corticotropin releasing-factor (CRH) is the primary but not the only
hypothalamic factor that regulates ACTH release. CRH is primarily found in the paraventricular nucleus. The release of both ACTH
and CRH are inhibited by the hormone cortisol secreted from the adrenal, and the release of both are strongly stimulated by stress.
Disorders of every hormone of the anterior pituitary have been identified and are characterized by either a hypo-secretion or over-
secretion following various lesions, trauma, or tumors.
NORMAL FLOW PATH
PITUITARY CUSHING'S SYNDROME
ECTOPIC CUSHING'S SYNDROME
ADRENAL CUSHING'S SYNDROME
1.
Figure 2.7
Schematic of disorders in control of endocrine secretion in
the CRF-ACTH-cortisol system.
Acromegaly and Gigantism results from excess GH in adults and in children, respectively. More than a cosmetic disease, these
conditions are associated with multiple system problems such as headaches, poor vision, sinus congestion, congestive heart
failure, impotence, kidney stones, paresthesias, weakness, and arthritis and is associated with a shortened life span.
2. Dwarfism results from insufficient GH in children, while decreased GH in adults is usually cryptic. However, GH supplements
are finding utility in restoring vigor in aged individuals.
3. Hyperprolactinaemia has many causes, is evidenced by hypogonadism and/or galactorrhea, and associated with pituitary
adenomas (the most common type of functional pituitary adenoma), hypothalamic or renal disease.
4. Prolactin deficiency is evidenced by an inability to lactate and often the first sign panhypopituitarism resulting from pituitary
infarction in the post-partum period (Sheehan’s Syndrome)
5. Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism occurs as a central, congenital or inherited disorder (Kallmann’s Syndrome) and an acquired
secondary disorder. In Kallmann’s Syndrome the LHRH-producing cells of the hypothalamus fail to migrate during
development from the olfactory placode into the brain. Acquired deficits occur as a result of hyperprolactinemia (adenoma),
anorexia, starvation, and stress.
6. Hypergonadotropism can occur with pituitary tumors as well as from ectopic hormone-producing tumors of the lung, liver and
germinal cell lines.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter02.html 5/10

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Hypothalamic Control of Pituitary Hormone (Section 4, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscienc…
7. Hypothyroidism can result due to failure of the thyroid gland (primary) or following pituitary or hypothalamic disease
(secondary). The primary form of the disease will result in hypertrophy of the thyrotrophs that can result in pituitary
enlargement resulting in visual field deficits.
8. Pituitary (TSH-induced) Hyperthyroidism is usually not a cause of hyperthyroidism but may occur in two conditions. First,
pituitary macroadenomas are associated with overproduction of the alpha subunit of TSH. Second, pituitary resistance to
thyroid hormone can occur.
9. Cushing’s disease is characterized by central distribution of adipose, muscle weakness, purplish striae, hypertension,
osteoporosis, fatigue and psychiatric changes. Primary Cushing’s disease. These usually are the result of microadenomas of
the pituitary in over 90 percent of cases and result due to macroadenomas in most of the remaining cases. Ectopic ACTH
production is not uncommon with some fast-growing tumors such as oat cell carcinoma of the lung, but in these conditions
the physical signs of hypercortisolemia are less pronounced. Rather, hypokalemia, muscle weakness, weight loss and
hyperpigmentation characterize patients. Ectopic ACTH produced by slower growing tumors show more characteristics of
typical Cushing’s disease. Overproduction of CRF is a rare cause of Cushing’s disease. (Figure 2.7)
10. ACTH deficiency is also called secondary adrenal insufficiency. It may reversibly occur following prolonged glucocorticoid
administration.
2.3 The Hypothalamic-Immune System-NeuroEndocrine Axis
Important bi-directional interactions between the immune system and the nervous and neuroendocrine systems have become
defined over the past twenty years (Figure 2.8). These interactions account for modification of immune system function by nervous
system activity and contrawise, modification of behavior, metabolism and neuroendocrine function by activity within the immune
system compartment. The cascade of behavioral responses induced by activation of the immune system is termed the acute phase
response, while the influence of brain activity on immunity has been termed psychoneuroimmunology.
Release:
CRF TRH LHRH GHRH
Show immune system involvement
Figure 2.8
Schematic of the Hypothalamic-Immune System-Neuroendocrine Axis.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter02.html 6/10

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Hypothalamic Control of Pituitary Hormone (Section 4, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscienc…
Figure 2.9
Detailed schematic of IL-1 mediated components of the
acute phase response.
The Acute Phase Response. The acute phase response is a constellation of behavioral and physiological changes that occur
following invasion of the body by pathogens or tissue injury that we know as “feeling sick”, and thus also called sickness behavior.
Fever is one component of the acute phase response (see previous chapter). Other components include an increase in slow wave
sleep, anorexia, affective and cognitive impairment, decreased social and sexual behavior and lowered pain threshold. In addition,
there are changes in blood chemistry including an increase in C-reactive protein, haptoglobin, serum amyloid A, a2-macroglobulin,
fibrinogen, plasma zinc and copper, and a decrease in plasma iron. Changes in these proteins and elements are mediated by the
liver following neural input that arises in the hypothalamus. These changes are geared to reallocate energy resources to the
generation of fever and the proliferation of immune cells and to induce as hostile an environment to invading pathogens as
possible. There are four primary cytokine mediators of this response.
1. Interleukin-1β (IL-1β) is the chief mediator of the acute phase response following infection. There are two additional members
of the IL-1 family, IL-1a and IL-1 receptor antagonist, but neither of these have any effect in producing the acute phase
response. IL-1β exerts its effects within the CNS by induction of the enzyme cyclo-oxygenase type 2 (COX2) in endothelial
cells of the vasculature at the circumventricular organs, especially the organum vasculosum of the lamina terminals (Figure
2.9). Induction of this enzyme results in the generation of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) that passes through the fenestrated blood
brain barrier and binds to the type 4 prostanoid receptor (EP4). Receptor binding raises cyclic adenosine monophosphate
(cAMP) in neurons of the hypothalamus and brainstem, most notably the preoptic anterior, paraventricular, and A2 nuclei,
which induces fever, activates the neuroendocrine axis and stimulates hepatic acute phase protein synthesis and release. An
alternate mechanism that may contribute to other aspects of sickness behavior is the binding of IL-1β to the receptors on the
subdiaphragmatic vagus.
Projections from the nucleus tractus solitarius to the hypothalamus, hippocampus, amygdala and other limbic sites are
proposed to induce somnolence, anorexia, irritability and cognitive impairment. This pathway and the central release of PGE2
has also been suggested to induce the mirror-like CNS generation of cytokines that is observed with activation of the immune
system. The CNS sources of cytokines, such as IL-1β, interferons, and TNF are from activated astrocytes, lie in the figure at
right, as well as from microglia and neurons.
2. Interleukin-6 does not induce the acute phase response when injected alone, yet nevertheless is the most potent agent for
prolonged induction of acute phase proteins when injected to the brain of animals already primed by interleukin-1. Most likely
these effects are because IL-6 receptor (IL-6R) is expressed at low levels in non-primed animals, but the receptor is up-
regulated during induction of sickness responses. Thus, it has been proposed that IL-6 functions to sustain the acute phase
response that is triggered by IL-1β. Activation of the neuroendocrine axis by IL-1ß and IL-6 results in elevated plasma cortisol
that in turn suppresses COX2 and IL-6R expression. This feedback is essential for termination of the acute phase response as
the illness resolves.
3. The interferons (type I) and tumor necrosis factor. These agents are much less potent than those above, yet play especially
prevalent roles in the sickness responses with viral and neoplastic illnesses.
4. Other hormones produced by lymphoid cells include a whole constellation we have already discussed including GH, Prolactin,
ACTH, TSH, β-endorphin and enkephalins that may also be involved in the signal pathways between the immune system and
the CNS.
Psychoneuroimmunology refers to the pathways that underlie brain-induced modifications of immune system function. These
pathways include the neuroendocrine system as well as inputs to all lymphoid tissues from the sympathetic and parasympathetic
nervous systems. Immunological responses can be conditioned like any other biological response and so, components of many
common diseases ranging from asthma to cancer have been correlated to various behavioral traits.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter02.html 7/10

0-10 min 1-2 hr TIME 1-4 hr
EPI, NE CORT HORMONES EPI, NE, CORT
1.
tnuoc
etycohpmyl
doolb
1/7/25, 10:08 AM Hypothalamic Control of Pituitary Hormone (Section 4, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscienc…
Eustress
Distress
stress recovery
Figure 2.10
Stress. Demographic studies of merchant marine from World War I detected high early mortality rates from a variety of
causes. This suggested the idea that chronic stress is an immune suppressant. Cortisol was subsequently shown to be a
powerful direct inhibitor of all lymphoid process and so became a widely used anti-inflammatory drug. Later stressful stimuli
adequate to induce CRF release from the hypothalamus were experimentally shown to result in immune suppression.
However, as research has progressed it has become clear that stress per se is not always counter productive to immunity. Low
levels of stress act to redistribute lymphoid cells from storage compartments such as the spleen into the circulation. Similarly,
low levels of cortisol, such as those normally provoked by infection, act to focus the immune response by creation of a type of
lateral inhibition so that only those cell lines with the most focused epitopes and so most strongly activated to proliferate
continue to expand. Thus, the stress response can be subdivided into eustress, which is beneficial to immunity, and distress,
which is immunosuppressive. (Figure 2.10)
2. Circadian Susceptibility to Disease is a direct consequence of the nervous system’s impact on immunological functions
(Figure 2.11). The levels of hormones and tone in the autonomic nervous system fluctuate through the course of the day.
Immunological function tends to be most suppressed early in the morning when the body is at its lowest level of sympathetic
tone and highest level of adrenocorticotropic activity. In converse, immunological function is at its peak in the evening as
sympathetic tone peaks. Patients almost always feel their best in the early morning hours and feel their worst in the evening.
Paradoxically, the peak in autonomic and neuroendocrine function in the evening results in peak physical performance in
healthy individuals at this same time of day.
INDIRECT LONG LOOP FEEDBACK
DIRECT LONG LOOP FEEDBACK
SHORT LOOP FEEDBACK
hypothalamic relea
hormone
ULTRA-SHORT LOOP FEEDBACK
SHOW ALL
Circulating hypophy
hormone (eg ACT
+
Figure 2.11
2.4 Summary
Secretion of the posterior pituitary hormones is directly from magnocellular neurons of the paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei
into the circulation. These neurons project axons into the posterior pituitary via the hypothalamo-neurohypophyseal tract and
terminate on a capillary bed of the inferior hypophyseal artery. Control of release in this system is under neural control and so this
represents a reflex system with neural input and hormonal output.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter02.html 8/10

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Hypothalamic Control of Pituitary Hormone (Section 4, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscienc…
Secretion of anterior pituitary hormones is driven by the influence of releasing, or release-inhibiting hormones (factors) that are
synthesized in parvocellular neurons of the supraoptic, paraventricular, arcuate and periventricular hypothalamic nuclei. These
neurons project axons in the tuberoinfundibular tract onto a capillary bed of the superior hypophyseal artery at the base of the
median eminence. These capillaries coalesce into the hypophyseal portal veins, which descend to the anterior pituitary and form a
second capillary bed where the anterior pituitary hormones are released. The anterior pituitary hormones diffuse to peripheral
targets to provoke release of endocrine hormones that induced tissue effects. Control of release in this system is via feedback of
releasing-hormones, anterior pituitary hormones, and peripheral endocrine hormones onto hypothalamic and pituitary cells in a
series of feedback loops. This system thus represents a hormone-and neural-evoked and hormone-output reflex.
The immune system provokes neural and neuroendocrine responses in an acute phase “sickness” response to illness or injury. The
immune system is also influenced by neural activity.
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
Inhibition of ACTH secretion by cortisol is an example of what type of neuroendocrine feedback loop?
A. ultra-short loop feedback
B. short-loop feedback
C. indirect long-loop feedback
D. direct long-loop feedback
E. indirect ultra-long loop feedback
Question 2 A B C D E
Which of the following is a possible pathway for CRF to reach the pituitary?
A. parvocellular arcuate nucleus neuron to tuberoinfundibular tract to hypophyseal portal
vein to anterior pituitary
B. magnocellular paraventricular neuron to tuberoinfundibular tract to hypophyseal portal
vein to anterior pituitary
C. parvocellular arcuate nucleus neuron to tuberoinfundibular tract to hypophyseal portal
vein to posterior pituitary
D. parvocellular arcuate nucleus neuron to hypothalamo-neurohypophyseal tract to
hypophyseal portal vein to posterior pituitary
E. parvocellular arcuate nucleus neuron to hypothalamo-neurohypophyseal tract to
anterior pituitary
Question 3 A B C D E
All of the following statements about the posterior pitutary system are correct EXCEPT:
A. Prolactin is secreted with neurophysin II.
B. This system is characterized by reflexes with neural input and hormonal output.
C. Neurons in the paraventricular and the supraoptic nuclei project to the posterior
pituitary via the hypothalamo-neurohypophyseal tract.
D. Inputs to the hypothalamus regulating the release of vasopressin include neurons with
cell bodies in sensory ganglia of the peripheral nervous system.
E. The blood supply to the posterior pituitary is provided by the inferior hypophyseal
artery.
Question 4 A B C D E
All of the following statements about the anterior pituitary are correct EXCEPT:
A. Hormones of the anterior pituitary are synthesized in the arcuate, periventricular and
supraoptic nuclei of the hypothalamus.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter02.html 9/10

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Hypothalamic Control of Pituitary Hormone (Section 4, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscienc…
B. Single parvocellular neurons of the supraoptic nucleus can control the synthesis and
release of more than one type of anterior pituitary hormone.
C. Parvocellular neurons in the arcuate nucleus project to hypophyseal portal veins via
the tuberoinfundibular tract.
D. Anterior pituitary hormones are secreted in circadian patterns.
E. The secretion of releasing hormones is controlled by multiple neurotransmitter systems
of the brain.
Question 5 A B C D E
Which of the following is the intracellular second messenger that initiates the acuate phase response
within neurons in the hypothalamus?
A. IL-1β
B. IL-6
C. PGE2
D. cAMP
E. COX2
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter02.html 10/10



1/7/25, 10:08 AM Hypothalamus: Structural Organization (Section 4, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences |…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 4: Homeostasis and Higher Brain Functions
Search
Chapter 1: Hypothalamus: Structural Organization
Patrick Dougherty, Ph.D., Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, MD Anderson Cancer Center
Last Review 20 Oct 2020
Homeostasis is the process by which a steady state of equilibrium,
HHyyppootthhaallaammuuss
or constancy, in the body with respect to physiological functions and
chemical compositions of fluids and tissues is maintained.
Physiological set points refer to the baseline level at which
functions such as heart rate, and at which chemical compositions
such as plasma sodium concentration are normally maintained.
These set points are represented in the brain by specific discharge
rates in neurons dedicated to the monitoring and control of specific
physiological processes. Thus, separate groups of neurons are
dedicated to the control of heart rate, temperature, etc., by their set
point discharge rate. The hypothalamus has the greatest
concentration of nuclei at which set points are encoded, monitored
and controlled, and so can be considered as the key brain region for
the control of homeostasis. Specific receptors and sensors
throughout the body detect disruptions in the normal balance of Video of lecture
body functions and chemistry that are produced by stress stimuli
that can range from injury or infection to pain and emotional
distress. These data are transmitted to the central nervous system and affect the discharge rate of set point neurons in hypothalamic nuclei (Figure
1.1). These changes in discharge rate result in altered hypothalamic efferent outflow and hence change in the functions of regulatory systems that
counteract the stress stimulus and restore homeostasis. These effects include alterations in the functions of the autonomic nervous system, endocrine
and immune systems, as well as alterations in behavior by hypothalamic influences on limbic brain circuitry. Each of the target systems influenced
by the hypothalamus return feedback controls onto the hypothalamus completing a circuit and so establishing a homeostasis system.
Figure 1.1
The homeostasis system
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter01.html 1/9

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Hypothalamus: Structural Organization (Section 4, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences |…
1.1 Anatomy of the Hypothalamus
The role of the hypothalamus in regulation of homeostasis is essential for survival and reproduction of the species. The importance
of this function is underscored by the structural organization and connectivity of the hypothalamus as almost every major
subdivision of the neuraxis communicates with the hypothalamus and is subject to its influence.
Landmarks that are visible on the ventral and medial (ventricular) surfaces of the brain define the boundaries of the hypothalamus.
The rostral boundary visible on the ventral surface of the brain is formed by the optic chiasm while the mammillary bodies define
the posterior boundary. Between these structures the oval prominence from the floor of the third ventricle is the tuber cinereum
and evaginating from this is the median eminence which then tapers into the infundibular stalk which together form the inferior
boundary of the hypothalamus. On the medial (ventricular) surface of the brain other structures contributing to the rostral
boundary that are visible include the lamina terminalis and the anterior commisure. Also visible on the medial surface of the brain is
the hypothalamic sulcus, which is the rostral continuation of the sulcus limitans that defines the superior boundary of the
hypothalamus. Finally, the internal capsule that is only visible on coronal or horizontal sections of the brain forms the lateral
boundary.
The hypothalamus is composed of three longitudinally oriented cell columns, or zones, that run the entire rostrocaudal length of the
hypothalamus (Figure 1.2). These zones can be further subdivided into four nuclear groups, or regions, based on rostrocaudal
position.
PLAY
Figure 1.2
Boundaries of the
hypothalamus
Zones. Immediately bordering the third ventricle, just inside of the ependymal cell lining, is a thin layer of cells that comprise the
periventricular zone. This zone contains few distinct nuclei, but two that are very prominent are the arcuate nucleus and the
paraventricular nucleus, which are involved in neuroendocrine and autonomic regulation. Immediately adjacent to the
periventricular zone is the medial zone, which is comprised of several cytoarchitectonically distinct nuclei that are listed below.
Nuclei in the medial zone are especially involved in the regulation of the autonomic nervous system as well as involved in regulation
of the neuroendocrine system. Finally, the lateral zone, has few nuclei or clear landmarks, but contains important fiber pathways
such as the median forebrain bundle. Demarcated by the fornix, the lateral zone is involved in regulation of the autonomic nervous
system.
START
PAUSE
Figure 1.3
Hypothalamic zones
Regions. Each of the zones described above are further subdivided into regions based on rostrocaudal landmarks (Figure 1.4). The
anterior region runs from the lamina terminalis to the caudal aspect of the optic chiasm. The portion of the anterior region that is
rostral to the optic chiasm is often also referred to as the preoptic region, however this distinction is now less emphasized. The next
region that is identified when proceeding caudally is the tuberal region. The margins of this region include the areas that are above
and including the tuber cinereum. Finally, the posterior region is defined by the area above and including the mammillary bodies.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter01.html 2/9

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Hypothalamus: Structural Organization (Section 4, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences |…
PLAY
Figure 1.4
Regions of the
hypothalamus
Nuclei. There are eleven major nuclei in the hypothalamus (Figure 1.5). The functions of many of these will be covered in further
detail in later sections. However, a brief note on the organization of these can be useful. The nuclei can be grouped based on their
locations in the hypothalamic zones and regions. Starting medially, the paraventricular nucleus is located in the periventricular zone
and runs rostrocaudally through the anterior into the tuberal region. The arcuate nucleus also has a portion located in the
periventricular zone though it also extends laterally into the medial zone. This nucleus sits in the floor of the tuberal region of the
hypothalamus. Both of these nuclei, along with the supraoptic nucleus, located just above the optic chiasm in the anterior region of
the medial zone extending laterally into the lateral zone, have key roles in neuroendocrine regulation. The paraventricular nucleus
also has an important role in regulation of the autonomic nervous system. Additional nuclei found in the anterior region of the
medial zone include the suprachiasmatic nucleus involved in circadian timing, the anterior nucleus involved in control of the
autonomic nervous system, and the preoptic nucleus which also extends into the lateral zone and involved in control of the
autonomic nervous system. Additional nuclei in the tuberal region of the medial zone include the dorsomedial and ventromedial
nuclei, which are involved in control of behavior and of appetite, body weight and insulin secretion, respectively. Nuclei of the
posterior region of the medial zone include the posterior nucleus, which is another autonomic nervous system control center, and
the mammillary nuclei, which are involved in control of emotional expression and memory. Finally, the lateral tuberal complex in the
tuberal region of the lateral zone is involved in control of appetite.
PLAY
Figure 1.5
Nuclei of the
hypothalamus
1.2 Circuitry of the Hypothalamus
The hypothalamus has the most complex circuitry of any brain region. Like other brain areas there are neural interconnections. But
unlike other brain areas, there are also extensive non-neural communication pathways between the hypothalamus and other brain
regions and the periphery.
Neural Connections. The most noteworthy (and complex) feature of the neural connections of the hypothalamus is that except for
a few exceptions, they are extensively bi-directional.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter01.html 3/9

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Hypothalamus: Structural Organization (Section 4, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences |…
Limbic Circuits. These pathways are essential for the normal expression and control of emotions, learning and reproductive
behavior. The bi-directional (afferent and efferent) pathways include the medial forebrain bundle, the fornix, the stria terminalis and
the ventral amygdalofugal pathway. The medial forebrain bundle interconnects basal forebrain structures including the septal nuclei
and ventral striatum with hypothalamus and structures in the brainstem tegmentum including the locus ceruleus, the parabrachial
nucleus, dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus. The fornix interconnects the hippocampal formation to the septal, preoptic and medial
mammillary nuclei. The stria terminalis interconnects the amygdala to the septal region and the hypothalamus especially, the
preoptic and ventromedial regions. Finally, the ventral amygdalofugal pathway interconnects the amygdala, especially the central
amygdaloid nucleus with the septal region and the preoptic areas of the hypothalamus. In addition to these bi-directional pathways,
there are also two unidirectional efferent limbic pathways from the hypothalamus. The mammillothalamic tract projects from the
mammillary nuclei to the anterior nucleus of the thalamus. The anterior nucleus of the thalamus in turn projects to the cingulate
cortex, which completes the circuit of Papez by projecting back onto the subiculum of the hippocampus. The circuit of Papez was
the first circuit proposed to mediate emotions and still is considered one of the chief circuits of the limbic system. The
mammillotegmental tract projects from the mammillary nuclei to the brainstem tegmentum and as far caudal as the lateral gray of
the spinal cord.
cortex
medial forebrain bundle
basal forebrain
amygdala hippocampus cingulu
m
fornix
septum Anterior
stria terminalis
a m
v ye gn dt ar la ol
fugal uit
of
Papez nth ua cl la em usic
pathway
Circ
Hypothalamus
mamillo-thalamic
eye
tract
mammillary
retino-hypothalamic tract
nucleus
dorsal longitudinal
fasciculus midbrain
mammilo-tegmental tract
spino-hypothalamic tract
hypothalamic-spinal tract
spinal cord
Figure 1.6
Sensory and Autonomic Circuits. These pathways provide visceral and somatosensory input to the hypothalamus and output of
the hypothalamus to control the autonomic nervous system. These pathways are especially important for the control of feeding,
insulin release and reproduction. The bi-directional pathways in this circuitry include the medial forebrain bundle noted as part of
limbic circuitry above, as well as the dorsal longitudinal fasciculus. Whereas the medial forebrain bundle runs laterally through the
brainstem and hypothalamus, the dorsal longitudinal fasciculus runs medially through the periventricular and periaqueductal gray
matter. Both pathways bring visceral and somatic input to the hypothalamus from the nucleus of the solitary tract, the parabrachial
nuclei, the reticular formation and the periaqueductal gray. The medial forebrain bundle also brings monoaminergic fibers
containing noradrenaline and serotonin into the hypothalamus from various brainstem nuclei including the raphe nuclei that have
key roles in modulating neuroendocrine functions. More rostral projections of these monoaminergic fibers as well as peptide-
containing efferent fibers that originate in the hypothalamus and join the medial forebrain bundle as it ascends into the orbital
cortex, insula and frontal cortex are involved in the control of motivation. Descending efferent projections of the hypothalamus
through these pathways terminate on parasympathetic nuclei of the brainstem such as the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus.
Unidirectional afferent input to the hypothalamus is derived from the spinohypothalamic tract and the retino-hypothalamic tract.
The spinohypothalamic tract is a component of the anterolateral system of somatosensory fibers that also includes the
spinothalamic tract and provides input concerning pain as well as input necessary for orgasm. The retino-hypothalamic tract
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter01.html 4/9

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Hypothalamus: Structural Organization (Section 4, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences |…
provides input to the suprachiasmatic nucleus that is used to entrain circadian rhythms to the light-dark cycle. Finally, unidirectional
efferent pathways from the hypothalamus include the hypothalamo-spinal tract, which projects onto brainstem and finally spinal
preganglionic sympathetic and parasympathetic neurons in the spinal intermediolateral cell column, and a histamine projection to
thalamus and cortex from the inferior lateral tuberal region that regulates the sleep-wake cycle.
Neuro-Humoral Connections. Unlike any other brain structure the hypothalamus both sends and receives information by way of
the blood stream. There are two pathways that comprise the neuro-humoral connections of the hypothalamus.
The Pituitary. These pathways include the hypophyseal-portal system of blood vessels that surround the median eminence, the
infundibulum and pituitary gland. The details of this system in neuroendocrine function will comprise the third chapter of this
section.
Figure 1.7
Circumventricular Organs. There are several sites at which the blood brain barrier is highly permeable and at which specific
transporters are present that allow passage of chemosensory stimuli from the blood into the brain. For example, the organum
vasculosum of the lamina terminalis is the site at which pyrogens such as interleukin-1 and tumor necrosis factor bind to receptors
that transport these molecules into the CNS and initiate the central synthesis of prostaglandins. These in turn act on the anterior
nucleus to initiate a change in body temperature set-point resulting in fever. Passage of hormones through both the organum
vasculosum and the median eminence is essential for normal feedback on the hypothalamus for neuroendocrine control. The area
postrema is the location of the chemotoxic trigger zone at which emesis is induced by various toxins in the blood stream and that
affect the hypothalamus to induce taste aversion. Passage of peptides through the subfornical organ are thought to participate in
mechanisms of learning, while passage of signals through the pineal body affects circadian and circannual timing patterns.
1.3 Functions of the Hypothalamus
It has been highlighted several times in this section that the overarching function of the hypothalamus is the integration of body
functions for the maintenance of homeostasis. The multiplicity of functions that are entailed in this level of integration should be
intuitively obvious. The table below lists many of these functions and the nuclear groups that are most closely associated their
execution.
Nucleus Zone(s) Region(s) Functions
Fluid balance, milk let-down,
Paraventricular Periventricular, Medial Anterior,Tuberal parturition, autonomic & anterior
pituitary control
Lateral anterior thermoregulation,
Preoptic Medial, Lateral Anterior
sexual behavior
Lateral anterior thermoregulation,
Anterior Medial Anterior
sexual behavior
Suprachiasmatic Medial Anterior Biological rhythms
Fluid balance, milk let-down,
Supraoptic Medial, Lateral Anterior
parturition
Dorsomedial Medial Tuberal Emotion (rage)
Appetite, body weight, insulin
Ventromedial Medial Tuberal
regulation
Arcuate Periventricular, Medial Tuberal Control of anterior pituitary, feeding
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter01.html 5/9

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Hypothalamus: Structural Organization (Section 4, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences |…
Posterior Medial Posterior Thermoregulation
Mammillary Medial Posterior Emotion and short-term memory
Lateral Complex Lateral Tuberal Appetite and body weight control
Thermoregulation, Neuroendocrine control, Feeding and Satiety. The details concerning thermoregulation, neuroendocrine
function, and control of feeding will be the subject of later chapters.
Biological Timing and Rhythms. Circadian timing refers to the daily fluctuations that occur in hormone levels, body temperature,
sleep-wake cycle, etc.; while circannual timing refers to fluctuations in function that occur on a yearly cycle. The chief hypothalamic
nucleus involved in this process is the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), which can be considered as the body’s master clock. The
neurons in the SCN have an intrinsic rhythm of discharge activity that will re-cycle in the absence of light at 25 hour intervals. This
activity is an intrinsic property of SCN neurons that can be maintained for days while the cells are maintained in culture. Input to
the SCN from the retinohypothalamic tract resets and entrains the activity of SCN neurons to the daily 24 hour light-dark cycle by
regulating the transcription of the light-sensitive clock, bmal, period (per) and cryptochrome (cry) genes. The retino-hypothalamic
tract is a non-rod, non-cone dependent input to the SCN from a subset of retinal ganglion cells that are directly activated by light
interacting with the pigment melanopsin. The SCN has projections into multiple hypothalamic nuclei that control the specific
functions that show daily or annual rhythms. Thus, the SCN is considered as a master pacemaker that regulates the functions of
multiple intra- and extra-hypothalamic slave oscillators. One extraordinary example of an extra-hypothalamic slave oscillator is the
induction of fetal circadian timing from the mother. A specific, and perhaps more concrete example of this circuitry is illustrated by
the regulation of melatonin secretion. Activation of the SCN by light results in increased input to the paraventricular nucleus, which
in turn activates sympathetic pre-ganglionic neurons in the T1-T2 spinal intermediolateral cell column. These neurons inhibit the
superior cervical ganglion which sends noradrenergic innervation into the pineal gland that inhibits the release of melatonin. With
the onset of darkness, this inhibition is removed, and so melatonin secretion increases through a disinhibition process (Figure 1.8).
SUN ON
Paraventricular nucleus
SUN OFF
Column of fornix Pineal gland
Anterior commisure
Corpus callosum
Lamina terminalis
Cerebellum
Optic chiasm
Suprachiasmatic
nucleus
Pituitary
Figure 1.8
There are two major classes of disorders in circadian timing, phase shifting and entrainment failure, both of which manifest
themselves as sleep disorders. The most common phase shift disorder is the rapid time-zone change syndrome, or jet lag,
characterized by daytime sleepiness and nighttime insomnia. The molecular biology of this disorder is becoming well-defined.
Circadian disruption is more sensitive to advances in local time than to delays. Circadian expression of mPer in SCN reacts rapidly
to an advance in light onset whereas expression of mCry advances slowly, at a maximum rate of 3hours/cycle. It is only when the
expression of both genes resume their baseline parallel expression that the behavioral and light:dark cycles become re-aligned. In
contrast, mPer and mCry expression cycles react rapidly and in parallel with a delay in light cycle, such that a complete reset is
achieved within one cycle. A second type of phase shift disorder is delayed sleep phase syndrome commonly seen in adolescents
and possibly linked to an endocrine-mediated desensitization of SCN pacemakers to phase-advancing stimuli. Finally, advanced
sleep phase syndrome, characterized by onset of sleep in the early evening followed by very early pre-dawn awakening is
commonly observed in the elderly and is associated with a missense mutation in mPer2. Entrainment failure is often, though not
always, observed in the blind. It is important to remember that the retino-hypothalamic tract has nothing to do with vision and so
can be preserved in the blind, and may also be absent in those with vision.
It has become increasingly evident that circadian timing can have tremendous impact on the susceptibility to disease as well as
conversely, to the optimal timing of curative therapy (Figure 1.9). Chronomorbidity refers to the observation that certain disorders
characteristically show peak prevalence at particular times of the day, whereas Chronotherapeutics is the application of therapies at
the time of day when their effects can be expected to have the greatest impact. The best current example of effective
chronotherapeutics is that treatment of seasonal affective disorder (a form of entrainment failure) is successfully treated with bright
light therapy only when applied during the morning hours.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter01.html 6/9

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Hypothalamus: Structural Organization (Section 4, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences |…
Figure 1.9
1.4 Summary
The hypothalamus is the key brain site for integration of multiple biologic systems to maintain homeostasis. Neurons in the
hypothalamus discharge in relation to multiple physiologic indices and change discharge rate with changes in these indices, thus
establishing set points. The three major systems controlled by the hypothalamus for maintenance of homeostasis are the
autonomic nervous system, the neuroendocrine system, and the limbic system.
The hypothalamus has well defined anatomical boundaries. Different regions of the hypothalamus are especially associated with the
control of specific physiological subsystems.
The broad scope of brain regions affected by the hypothalamus is reflected by a very widespread extent of connectivity of the
hypothalamus to other brain areas and by unique neuro-humoral communication pathways.
One key function of the hypothalamus is regulation of body functions in concert with the daily light:dark cycle. Intrinsic timing
mechanisms of neurons in the suprachiasmatic nucleus controlled by the expression of the light sensitive clock, bmal, per, and cry
genes establish the master pacemaker of the body. The activity of these cells is set in phase to light by inputs from a special subset
of non-rod, non-cone dependent melanopsin-containing retinal ganglion cells via the retino-hypothalamic tract.
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
Which of the following is not a visible boundary of the hypothalamus in a hemisected brain?
A. The median eminence
B. The mammillary body
C. The optic chiasm
D. The internal capsule
E. The anterior commisure
Question 2 A B C D E
The hypothalamic sulcus is the rostral continuation of what anatomical feature of he brainstem?
A. The tuberculum cinereum
B. The stria medullaris
C. The sulcus limitans
D. The lateral sulcus
E. The dorsal paramedian sulcus
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter01.html 7/9

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Hypothalamus: Structural Organization (Section 4, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences |…
Question 3 A B C D E
Which of the following pathways provides unidirectional afferent input to the hypothalamus?
A. The mammillotegmental tract
B. The medial forebrain bundle
C. The fornix
D. The dorsal longitudinal fasciculus
E. The spinohypothalamic tract
Question 4 A B C D E
Which of the following characteristics best accounts for the hypothalamus being the key brain region
for control of homeostasis?
A. The hypothalamus is the only brain region that both sends and receives information to
the body via the blood stream.
B. The hypothalamus has the greatest concentration of nuclei at which physiological set
points are encoded, monitored, and controlled.
C. The hypothalamus is the only brain region that has both direct neural input and output
to the peripheral nervous system.
D. The hypothalamus is the key brain region for the integration of neuroendocrine and
autonomic function with emotion.
E. The hypothalamus is essential for normal circadian timing.
Question 5 A B C D E
Which of the following hypothalamic nuclei is most important for encoding the set point for daily
circadian rhythms?
A. supraoptic nucleus
B. arcuate nucleus
C. suprachiasmatic nucleus
D. preoptic anterior nucleus
E. paraventricular nucleus
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter01.html 8/9

1/7/25, 10:08 AM Hypothalamus: Structural Organization (Section 4, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences |…
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter01.html 9/9



Functional specificity in the human brain: A window
into the functional architecture of the mind
NancyKanwisher1
McGovernInstituteforBrainResearch,MassachusettsInstituteofTechnology,Cambridge,MA02139
ThiscontributionispartofthespecialseriesofInauguralArticlesbymembersoftheNationalAcademyofScienceselectedin2005.
ContributedbyNancyKanwisher,April16,2010(sentforreviewFebruary22,2010)
Isthehumanmind/braincomposedofasetofhighlyspecialized The second ongoing controversy concerns the question of
components,eachcarryingoutaspecificaspectofhumancognition, whether only basic sensory and motor functions are carried out
orisitmoreofageneral-purposedevice,inwhicheachcomponent infunctionallyspecializedregions,orwhetherthesamemightbe
participatesinawidevarietyofcognitiveprocesses?Fornearlytwo trueevenforhigher-levelcognitivefunctions.Althoughonemight
centuries, proponents of specialized organs or modules of the thinkthatBrocasettledthismatterwithhisdemonstrationthatthe
mindandbrain—fromthephrenologiststoBrocatoChomskyand leftfrontallobeisspecializedforaspectsoflanguage,thecurrent
Fodor—havejoustedwiththeproponentsofdistributedcognitive statusofthisdebateisfarfromclear.Indeed,arecentauthorita-
andneuralprocessing—fromFlourenstoLashleytoMcClellandand tivereviewofthebrain-imagingliteratureonlanguageconcludes
Rumelhart.IargueherethatresearchusingfunctionalMRIisbegin- that“areasofthebrainthathavebeenassociatedwithlanguage
ningtoanswerthislong-standingquestionwithnewclarityand processingappeartoberecruitedacrossothercognitivedomains”
precisionbyindicatingthatatleastafewspecificaspectsofcogni-
(2).Thecaseoflanguageisnotunique.Indeed,abacklashagainst
tionareimplementedinbrainregionsthatarehighlyspecializedfor strong functional specialization seems to be in vogue. A recent
thatprocessalone.Corticalregionshavebeenidentifiedthatare neuroimagingtextbookarguesthat“unlikethephrenologists,who
specializednotonlyforbasicsensoryandmotorprocessesbutalso believedthatverycomplextraitswereassociatedwithdiscretebrain
forthehigh-levelperceptualanalysisoffaces,places,bodies,visu- regions,modernresearchersrecognizethat...asinglebrainregion
allypresentedwords,andevenfortheveryabstractcognitivefunc- mayparticipateinmorethanonefunction”(3).
tionofthinkingaboutanotherperson’sthoughts.Ifurtherconsider
Inthisreview,Iaddresstheseongoingcontroversiesaboutthe
the as-yet unanswered questions of how much of the mind and degreeandnatureoffunctionalspecializationinthehumanbrain,
brain are made up of these functionally specialized components
arguingthatrecentneuroimagingstudieshavedemonstratedthat
andhowtheyarisedevelopmentally. atleastafewbrainregionsareremarkablyspecializedforsingle
| | | high-levelcognitive functions. Tomakemycase, Ifirstdescribe
brainimaging modularity functionalMRI fusiformfacearea three candidates for such functionally specific brain regions
identifiedinmylab.Ithenconsiderhowmuchofthebrainismade
Understanding thenatureofthehumanmindisarguablythe upfunctionallyspecializedregions:aretheyfoundonlyforhigh-
greatestintellectualquestofalltime.Itisalsooneofthemost level perceptual functions or also for components of abstract
challenging,requiringthecombinedinsightsnotonlyofpsychol- thought?Ithenaskhowtheseregionsarisedevelopmentally;that
ogists,computerscientists,andneuroscientistsbutofthinkersin is, what are the exact roles of genes and experience in the de-
nearlyeveryintellectualpursuit,frombiologyandmathematicsto velopmentoftheseregions?InSIText,Iaddressakeychallengeto
artandanthropology.Here,Idiscussonecurrentlyfruitfulcom- the specificity of the fusiform face area (FFA) and parahippo-
ponentofthisgrandenterprise:theefforttoinferthearchitecture campal place area (PPA), and I consider the computational
of the human mind from the functional organization of the
advantagesthatmaybeaffordedbyspecializedregionsinthefirst
humanbrain. place.Iconcludebyspeculatingthatthecognitivefunctionsim-
Theideathatthehumanmind/brainismadeupofhighlyspe- plementedinspecializedbrainregionsarestrongcandidatesfor
cialized components began with the Viennese physician Franz fundamentalcomponentsofthehumanmind.
JosephGall(1758–1828).Gallproposedthatthebrainistheseat
NeuroimagingEvidence forFunctionalSpecialization in the
ofthemind,thatthemindiscomposedofdistinctmentalfaculties, VentralVisualPathway
andthateachmentalfacultyresidesinaspecificbrainorgan.A
EversinceBroca,neurologistsandcognitiveneuroscientistshave
heateddebateonlocalizationoffunctioninthebrainragedover
thenextcentury(SIText),withmanyofthemajorfiguresinthe investigated cognitive impairments in people with focal brain
lesions, providing extensive evidence for localization of at least
historyofneuroscienceweighingin(Broca,Brodmann,andFer-
some functions in the human brain. The study of neurological
rierinfavor,andFlourens,Golgi,andLashleyopposed).Bythe
disorders is one of the few methods that allows powerful infer-
early20thcentury,aconsensusemergedthatatleastbasicsensory
ences about not just the engagement but also the necessity of
andmotorfunctionsresideinspecializedbrainregions. agivenbrainregionforaspecificcognitivefunctioninhumans.
Thedebatedidnotendthere,however.Today,acenturylater, However, even if a particular functionally specific region exists,
twoquestionsarestillfiercelycontested.First, howfunctionally
a lesion is unlikely to affect all and only that region, so clean
specialized are regions of the brain? The concept of functional
functional dissociations in the patient literature are rare. Brain
specializationisnotallornonebutamatterofdegree;acortical imaging[andfunctionalMRI(fMRI)inparticular]thusprovides
regionmightbeonlyslightlymoreengagedinonementalfunction
thananother,oritmightbeexclusivelyengagedinasinglemental
function. Many neuroscientists today challenge the strong (ex-
Authorcontributions:N.K.wrotethepaper.
clusive)versionoffunctionalspecialization.Asonevisualneuro- Theauthordeclaresnoconflictofinterest.
scientist put it, “each extrastriate visual area, rather than per-
1E-mail:ngk@mit.edu.
formingaunique,one-functionanalysis,isengaged,asaremost
Thisarticlecontainssupportinginformationonlineatwww.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
neuronsinthevisualsystem,inmanydifferenttasks”(1).
1073/pnas.1005062107/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1005062107 PNAS | June22,2010 | vol.107 | no.25 | 11163–11170
.212.481.95.271
sserdda
PI
morf
5202
,7
yraunaJ
no
212.481.95.271
yb
gro.sanp.www//:sptth
morf
dedaolnwoD
ELCITRALARUGUANI
ECNEICSORUEN

apowerfulcomplementtolesionstudies,allowingneuralactivityin althoughtheirtheoreticalsignificancecanbedebated,theirexis-
thenormalhumanbraintobemonitoredsafelyandnoninvasively tencecannot.Indeed,theseregionsarefound,inmoreorlessthe
at resolutions approaching the millimeter range. The principle sameplace,invirtuallyeveryneurologicallyintactsubject;theyare
underlying fMRI is that blood flow increases locally in active partofthebasicfunctionalarchitectureofthehumanbrain.Sec-
regionsofthebrain.AlthoughthepreciseneuraleventsthatfMRI ond,thecategoryselectivitybywhicheachregionisdefinedisnot
reflectsareamatterofongoingresearch,thegeneralvalidityofthe merelystatisticallysignificant,butalsolargeineffectsize:Eachof
methodasanindicatorofneuralactivityisclearfromstudiesrep- theseregionsrespondsabouttwiceasstronglytostimulifromits
licating, with fMRI, the properties of visual cortex previously preferredcategoryastoanynonpreferredstimuli.*Althoughef-
established by the gold-standard method of single-neuron re- fect size is generally ignored in the brain imaging literature, it
cordinginmonkeys.ThousandsofpapershaveusedfMRItoask shouldnotbe,asitdeterminesthestrengthoftheinferenceyou
abouttherelativecontributionsofdifferentregionsinthehuman candraw:Ifyouknowhowtodoubletheresponseofaregion,you
braintoawidevarietyofcognitivefunctions.Mylabhasfocused generallyhaveabetterhandleonitsfunctionthanifyoumerely
especiallyonthequestionofwhetheranyofthesebrainregionsare knowhowtochangeitsresponsebyasmallamount.Third,thefact
specificallyengagedinasinglehigh-levelcognitivefunction. thattheseregionscanbefoundeasilyinanynormalsubjectmakes
Supporting the idea that some brain regions are indeed en- possible a “region of interest” (ROI) research strategy whereby
gagedinspecificmentalfunctions, wehaveidentifiedanumber the region is first functionally identified in each subject indi-
ofcorticalregions(Fig.1)thatrespondselectivelytosinglecat- vidually in a short “localizer” scan, and then the response of
egories of visually presented objects: most notably, the FFA, that region is measured in any number of new conditions that
which responds selectively to faces (4, 5), the PPA, which re- test specific hypotheses about its exact function. It is precisely
sponds selectively to places (6), and the extrastriate body area the fact that the responses of the FFA, PPA, and EBA have
(EBA),whichrespondsselectivelytobodiesandbodyparts(7). beenquantifiedineachofnowdozensofdifferentstimulusand
Thesethreebrainregionsarenottheonlyonesthathavebeen task manipulations that enables us to say with confidence that
arguedtoconductspecificperceptualfunctions(8).Probablythe eachoftheseregionsisprimarily,ifnotexclusively,engagedin
strongestothercaseisvisualareaMT/V5,shownmuchearlierwith processingitspreferredstimulusclass(faces,places,andbodies,
neurophysiologicalmethodstoplayakeycausalroleintheper- respectively). Taken together, these three regions constitute
ceptionofvisualmotioninmonkeys(9–11),andlater,identifiedin someofthestrongestevidencethatatleastsomecorticalregions
humans with brain imaging (12, 13). However, even this classic areselectivelyengagedinprocessingspecificclassesofstimuli.
exampleoffunctional specificitydoesnotprocessvisual-motion Next I summarize the evidence for the specificity of each of
informationexclusively;thisareaalsocontainsinformationabout theseregionsforaparticularclassofstimuli.
stereodepth(14).Anotherstrongcaseoffunctionalspecificityfor
asimplevisualdimensioniscolor(15),forwhichrecentevidence FFA.TheFFAistheregionfoundinthemidfusiformgyrus(onthe
frombothfMRIandsingle-unitrecordingindicatestheexistence bottomsurfaceofthecerebralcortexjustabovethecerebellum)
of multiple millimeter-sized color-selective “globs” in posterior thatrespondssignificantlymorestronglywhensubjectsviewfaces
inferotemporalcortexinmacaques(16,17).Otherbrainregions thanwhentheyviewobjects(4,5,23).Thisregionrespondssim-
have been reported to be selectively engaged in processing in- ilarlytoawidevarietyofdifferentkindsoffaceimages(24),in-
formation about biological motion (18), visually guided reaching cludingphotosoffamiliarandunfamiliarfaces,schematicfaces,
(19),andgrasping(20).Formostcasesintheneuroimagingliter- cartoonfaces,andcatfacesaswellasfacespresentedindifferent
ature,however,themainclaimisoneofregionalspecificity(i.e., sizes,locations,andviewpoints(25,26).Crucially,whenrelatively
thattheimplicatedfunctionactivatesthisregionmorethanother
high-resolutionimagingmethodsareused(includingindividual–
brain regions) rather than of functional specificity (i.e., that the subjectanalyseswithoutspatialsmoothing),nononfaceobjecthas
implicated region is more engaged for this function than other beenreportedtoproducemorethanone-halftheresponsefound
functions).Incontrast,thisarticlefocusesprimarilyonthequestion forfacesinthisregion.Further,theevidence(27,28)allowsusto
offunctionalspecificity,becausethisisthequestionthatiscritical rejectalternativehypothesesproposedearlierthattheFFAisnot
forunderstandingthearchitectureofthehumanmind(Fig.1). specifically responsive to faces but rather is more generally en-
TheevidenceweandothershavecollectedontheFFA,PPA,
gagedinfine-graineddiscriminationofexemplarsofanycategory
andEBAprovidesunusuallystrongsupportforfunctionalspeci- or of any category for which the subject has gained substantial
ficityoftheseregionsforthreereasons.First,eachoftheseregions expertise.Importantly,themagnitudeoftheFFAresponseisco-
hasbeenfoundconsistentlyindozensofstudiesacrossmanylabs; rrelatedtrialbytrialwithsuccessbothindetectionofthepresence
offacesandinidentificationofindividualfaces(29,30).Thus,as
discussedfurtherinSIText,theFFAseemstoplayacentralrolein
the perception of faces but to play little if any role in the per-
ceptionofnonfaceobjects.Thishypothesisisconsistentwithevi-
dencethat(i)face-selectiveresponseshavebeenobservedinap-
proximately this location in subdural electrode recordings from
the brains of subjects undergoing presurgical mapping for epi-
lepsytreatment(31–33)and(ii)lesionsinapproximatelythislo-
cationcanproduceselectivedeficitsinfaceperception(34).
AnsweringthequestionofwhatexactlytheFFAdoeswithfaces
hasbeenmoredifficult.Currentevidenceindicates,however,that
itissensitivetomultipleaspectsoffacestimuliincludingfaceparts
Fig.1. Thisschematicdiagramindicatestheapproximatesizeandlocation *fMRIresponsemagnitudesaretypicallymeasuredaspercentsignalincreasescompared
ofregionsinthehumanbrainthatareengagedspecificallyduringpercep- withalowbaselinecondition(e.g.,fixatingonacross),soa2-foldresponsedifference
mightcorrespondtoa2%signalincreasefromfixationversusa1%signalincreasesfrom
tion of faces (blue), places (pink), bodies (green), and visually presented
fixation.Crucially,themagnitudeofselectivitymustbeevaluatedusingdataindepen-
words(orange),aswellasaregionthatisselectivelyengagedwhenthinking
dentofthatusedtoidentifytheregion(21,22).Selectivityisunderestimatedwhenlow-
about another person’s thoughts (yellow). Each of these regions can be resolutionmethodsareused(e.g.,whenvoxelsarelargeorwhenspatialsmoothingor
foundinashortfunctionalscaninessentiallyallnormalsubjects. groupanalysesareused).
11164 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1005062107 Kanwisher
.212.481.95.271
sserdda
PI
morf
5202
,7
yraunaJ
no
212.481.95.271
yb
gro.sanp.www//:sptth
morf
dedaolnwoD

(eyes, noses, and mouths), the T-shaped configuration of those drils or even multiple nonadjacent but nearby (and presumably
features, and external features of faces like hair (35) and that connected)subregionsmightbeexpected.Ifitbecomesclearat
representationsextractedintheFFAshowsomeinvarianceacross higher resolutions that the FFA is in fact a set of distinct non-
changesinstimuluspositionandlessinvarianceacrosschangesin contiguous regions (a “fusiform face archipelago”?), that will
viewpoint(25),mirroringcomparablebehavioralresults.TheFFA straintheorgananalogybutstillleaveviableameaningfulsensein
further exhibits neural correlates of long-known behavioral sig- whichthesenoncontiguouspatchesconstituteafunctionallydis-
natures of perception (28), including disproportionate inversion tinctsystem,muchasMauiandLanaisharedeepgeological,bi-
effects(36)andsensitivitytoholisticinformationinuprightbutnot ological, and cultural similarities in virtue of being part of the
invertedfaces(37).Despitetheseinitialinsights,importantopen Hawaiian islands, despite the channel of water between them.
questionsabouttheFFAremaintobeaddressed,includingamore However, the more a region turns out to be extensively inter-
precisecharacterizationoftherepresentationsthatitextractsand digitatedwithotherfunctionallydistinctentitiesandthemoreits
the computations that it performs, whether it plays some (albeit bordersresembleanarbitrarycutoffpointonagradualfunctional
lesser) role in the perception of any nonface objects, whether it change across the cortex (52), the less this case will follow the
iscytoarchitectonicallydistinctfromitsneighbors,whatotherre- classicideaofafunctionallydistinctbrainregion.Mostquestions
gionsitisconnectedto,whetherandhowinteractionswithother aboutbiologicalsystemsaremattersofdegree,andsotooisthe
regionsmodulateorparticipateinthecomputationsconductedin question of functional specialization in the cortex. Currently
theFFAandwhetheritconstitutesasinglecontiguousregionon available evidence suggests an impressive degree of compart-
thecorticalsurface. mentalizationinatleastafewcorticalregions(53).Furtherex-
periments using new tasks and higher resolution will provide
PPA. The PPA is defined functionally as the region adjacent to moreprecisequantitative testsoftheanatomicaldistinctnessof
the collateral sulcus in parahippocampal cortex that responds theseregions.
significantly more strongly to images of scenes than objects (6). Insum,evidenceisnowstrongthateachofatleastthreecor-
ThePPArespondstoawidevarietyofscenes,includingindoor ticalregionsinhumansareselectively(perhapsevenexclusively)
and outdoor scenes, familiar and unfamiliar scenes, and even engagedinspecificcognitivefunctions:theFFAinrepresenting
abstract scenes made of Legos (38, 39). The PPA is primarily theappearanceoffaces,thePPAinrepresentingtheappearance
responsive to the spatial layout of one’s surroundings: its re- ofplaces,andtheEBAinrepresentingtheappearanceofbodies.
sponseisnotreducedwhenalloftheobjectsareremovedfrom (SeeSITextformyreplytoanimportantchallengetothefunc-
an indoor scene, leaving just the floor and walls (6). This re- tional specificity of theseregions.)Although Ihave emphasized
sponseprofileistantalizinglyreminiscentofthegeometricmod- the role of each of these regions in visual perception, their re-
ule (40, 41), inferred from behavioral data in which rats and sponseisnotdeterminedsolelybythestimulusthatthesubjectis
human infants (and adults whose language system is tied up by viewing.Theactivityoftheseregionscanbestronglymodulated
aconcurrentverbaltask)relyexclusivelyonthelayoutofspace, byvisualattention(54),andtheycanevenbeactivatedwhenno
not on objects or landmarks, to reorient themselves in an envi- stimulus is present at all. Simply imagining a face (with eyes
ronmentaftertheyaredisoriented.EvidencethatthePPAisnot closed)selectivelyactivatestheFFAandimaginingaplaceacti-
only activated when information about spatial layout is pro- vatesthePPA(55).
cessed, but that it is further necessary for this function, comes Of course, no complex cognitive process is accomplished in
from patients with damage in or near the PPA, who have diffi- a single brain area, and arguments for the specificity of these
culty encoding information about spatial layout and more gen- regionsbynomeansimplythatotherbrainregionsplaynorole.
erally,inknowingwheretheyare(42,43).Thepreciseroleofthe Earliercorticalregionssuchasprimaryvisualcortexareobviously
PPA in place perception and navigation is a topic of ongoing crucialintheperceptionoffaces,places,andbodies,andhigher
investigation(38,39). areas (e.g., in parietal and frontal regions) are also probably
necessaryforinformationintheFFA,PPA,andEBAtobeused
EBA.TheEBAisaregiononthelateralsurfaceofthebrainad- byothercognitivesystemsandtoreachawareness(56–58).Fur-
jacentto(andsometimespartlyoverlappingwith)visualmotion ther, none of these regions is the only one with its defining se-
areaMT,whichrespondssignificantlymorestronglytoimagesof lectivity.Forfaces,selectiveresponsesarefoundnotonlyinthe
bodies and body parts than to images of objects or faces. This FFAbutalsoinanearbybutmoreposterioroccipitalfacearea,as
regionrespondsequallytovisuallyverydifferentimagesofbodies wellasotherregionsinthesuperiortemporalsulcus(34,59),and
andbodyparts,fromaphotographofahandtoaphotographof anterior temporal pole(60).For bodies, selective responses are
abody(humanoranimal)toaschematicstickfigureofaperson. found not only in the EBA but also in the fusiform body area
Evidencethatthisregionisnotonlyactivatedduringbutisalso (FBA).Forscenes,selectiveresponsesarefoundnotonlyinthe
necessary for the perception of bodies comes from studies in PPA but also in retrosplenial cortex (RSC) and the transverse
whichdisruptionoftheEBAbyabrainlesion(44)ortranscranial occipital sulcus (TOS). These other selective regions have not
magnetic stimulation (TMS) (45, 46) impairs the perception of beenstudied inthesamedetail astheFFA, PPA,andEBA,so
bodyformbutnot theperception offaces orobjectshape(45). their functions are less clear. Still, the existence of multiple se-
Further,currentevidenceindicatesthattheEBAismoreinvolved lectiveregionsforeachofthesethreestimulusclassesraisesthe
inperceivingotherpeople’sbodiesthanone’sown(47,48)and exciting possibility that we may ultimately understand how the
thatitismoreengagedintheperceptionoftheform/identityof perceptofaface,forexample,emergesfromthejointactivityof
bodiesthanintheactionstheyarecarryingout(44,49–51). anumberoffunctionallydistinctregions,eachconductingadif-
ferent aspect of the analysis of the face stimulus. In the sub-
Ovals,Gradients,orArchipelagoes?Forsimplicity,Ihavediscussed sequent sections of this article, I discuss four major questions
functionally specific regions in the cortex as if they are discrete raisedbytheworkontheFFA,EBA,andPPAconcerningtheir
entities with sharp, well-delineated edges, like the kidney, liver, specificity,generality,origins,andcomputationalsignificance.
andheart.Indeed,somefunctionaldivisionsinthecortexarere-
markably sharp, such as the border between retinotopic visual Generality:HowMuch oftheBrainIs Composedof
areas V1 and V2. However, there is no reason to assume all Functionally SpecificRegions?
functional distinctions in the brain have perfectly sharp edges. Theevidenceforfunctionalspecificitywithinseveralbrainregions
Similarly,thereshouldbenorequirementthattheseregionsmust (FFA,PPA,EBA)invitesareturntothebroaderquestionsraised
besimpleconvexshapes.Irregular-shapedregionswithlongten- byGall,Fourens,andBroca:howmuchofthebrainiscomposedof
Kanwisher PNAS | June22,2010 | vol.107 | no.25 | 11165
.212.481.95.271
sserdda
PI
morf
5202
,7
yraunaJ
no
212.481.95.271
yb
gro.sanp.www//:sptth
morf
dedaolnwoD
ELCITRALARUGUANI
ECNEICSORUEN

regionsthatareselectivelyengagedinspecificcognitivefunctions? For our first test of this method, we scanned subjects while
We consider this question by asking whether other specialized theyviewedeightdifferentcategoriesofstimuli.Remarkably,the
brain regions exist for (i) other object categories in the ventral methodspontaneouslyidentifiedface-,place-,andbody-selective
visualpathwayand(ii)componentsofhigh-levelthought. responseprofilesamongthetopfivemostrobustprofiles(Fig.S1
andSIText).Evenmoreimpressively,whenwesplitthedatain
Other Category-Selective Regions? Do we have cortical regions half to produce 16 different conditions (two per category),
selectively involved in the perception of snakes? Weapons? withouttellingthealgorithmwhichpairsofconditionsbelonged
Vegetables? As Pinker asks in The Language Instinct, does the tothesamecategory,thealgorithmdiscoveredresponseprofiles
brain have a produce section (61)? What about categories of characterized by high responses to both face conditions com-
objects that may not have been crucial to the survival of our pared with everything else, although these conditions were not
ancestors but that play central roles in modern daily lives, like labeledasthesamecategory.Wefoundthesameforscenesand
carsandcellphones?Therehardlyseemsroominthebrainfor bodies.Theseresultssuggestthatface,place,andbodyselectivity
allofthesecategories,orevenalloftheimportantones,anditis are not simply our own cultural projections onto the brain but
not clear what would be accomplished computationally by such are actually inherent in the brain’s response to visual stimuli.
extreme compartmentalization anyway. Happily, we are not re- Also, they suggest that we do not have similar specificity in the
stricted to mere speculation; we can simply test empirically for brainforlotsofothercategories;face,place,andbodyselectivity
otherspecializedbrainregions.DowningandIdidjustthat(62), are probably special cases. We are now conducting a stronger
screening broadly for 20 different categories of objects selected testofthishypothesisbygeneratingalargersetofstimulimore
fortheir(arguable)evolutionaryimportance(spidersandsnakes, representative of human visual experience and asking whether
predators, prey, tools, food), their experiential frequency in face,place,andbodyselectivitystillemergefromthedata,even
modernlife(cars,chairs),ortheirimplicationfrompriorstudies whennostimuluscategoriesarepresumedinadvanceandeven
of patients with focal brain damage (fruits and vegetables, mu- when we do not start by constructing a stimulus set that con-
sical instruments). Despite replicating the existence of cortical tainsasizableproportionoffaces,places,andbodies.Itwillbe
regionsselectiveforfaces,places,andbodiesineachsubject,we most exciting if this new test not only (re)discovers face, place,
foundnoevidenceofcorticalspecializationforanyoftheother andbodyselectivitybutalsodiscoversnew,previouslyunknown,
object categories tested. The previously reported selectivity for
responseprofiles.
tools (63) was not evident in our data, and any partial disso-
SelectiveCorticalRegionsforAspectsofThought?Perhapsitisnot
ciationsbetweenresponsestolivingandnonlivingthings(oran-
surprising that discrete cortical regions can be found that are
imate versus inanimate objects) were restricted to the already
selectively engaged in processing specific aspects of high-level
documented properties of the face, place, and body areas. Al-
vision. After all, we are highly visual animals who allocate one-
though null results can always be trumped by later discoveries
thirdofourcortextovariousaspectsofvision,andsomedivision
made with higher spatial resolution or greater statistical power,
theresolutionandpowerthatwassufficientforrobustreplication of computational labor within this broad expanse of cortex
wouldseemtomakesense.Butwhatabouttherestofcognition?
of the FFA, PPA, and EBA did not turn up any new category- Dowehavespecializedbrainmachineryforspecificcomponents
specificregions.
ofthought?
Acentralconceptualpuzzlearises,however,inthesearchfor
Indeed,wedo.Severalyearsago,RebeccaSaxemadetheas-
brain regions selective for new object categories: how do we
tonishingdiscoveryofaregionatthejunctionofthetemporaland
decidewhichcategoriestotest?Ifweproceedbytestingonlythe
parietallobesoftherighthemispherethatisselectivelyengaged
categoriesthatseemplausibletous,thenweriskgettingtrapped
whenonethinksaboutwhatanotherpersonisthinking(67,68).
within the confines of our own theoretical preconceptions. This
UsingtheROImethod,Saxeandcolleagues(67,68)haveiden-
concernisunderscoredbythefactthatthebrainspecializations tifiedthisregion(knownastherTPJ)inhundredsofsubjectsand
alreadydescribedforfaces,places,andbodiesarereminiscentof
measureditsresponsetoawidearrayoftasks.Thesedatashow
two of the mental faculties proposed by Gall: the sense of peo- thattherTPJrespondsstronglywhenpeoplereadscenariosthat
ple, and the sense of place. Given that Gall arrived at these
describewhatapersonknowsorthinksbutnotwhenpeopleread
categorieswithoutrealevidence,thefactthatwehavearrivedat
scenariosdescribingphysical,asopposedtomental,representa-
thesamecategoriesisworrisome.Arewe,likethephrenologists,
tions (e.g., in maps or photographs) or vivid descriptions of
allowing our cultural biases to determine what we find in the aperson’sphysicalappearancethatdonotrefertothecontentsof
brain?Arespecializationswediscoverinthebrainakindofhigh- theperson’smind.Thisregionissoselectivethatitdoesnoteven
techprojective test? respond when people think about another person’s bodily sen-
Withrigorousexperimentalmethods,wecanreducethechance sations(e.g.,thirst,hunger,pleasure),whicharementalstatesbut
thattheoutcomesofourexperimentsaredeterminedbyourcul- whichdonothavepropositionalcontentlikethoughtsandbeliefs.
tural/theoreticalpredispositions.However,howcanweeverpre- Most impressively, this region is more strongly activated when
ventourconceptualbaggagefrombiasingthespaceofhypotheses people make decisions about what another person knows than
thatweconsider?MycolleaguesandIaredevelopingmethodsto when they make the identical response to the identical stimuli
circumventthesebiasesbysearchingforstructureinthefunctional but do not construe the task as pertaining to another person’s
responses of the ventral visual cortex in a hypothesis-neutral thoughts (69). The rTPJ is the most functionally selective high-
fashion(64–66).Thismethodsearcheslargedatasetscomposedof
levelcorticalregionyetdescribedinhumans.
theresponseofeachvoxeltoalargenumberofstimulianddis- The discovery of the rTPJ, and the characterization of its
coversdominantresponseprofilesinthatdataset.Importantly,the functionalspecificity,servesasanexistenceproofthatfunction-
method knows nothing about the location of each voxel, so it allyspecificcorticalregionsarenotrestrictedtoprimarysensory
makesnoassumptionthatfunctionallyrelatedvoxelsareadjacent. and motor areas, or high-level perceptual regions, but can be
Evenmoreimportantly,themethoddoesnotlookonlyforselec- foundforatleastoneveryabstractandhigh-levelaspectofhu-
tivity for single-object categories but instead, for any profile of mancognition.Thisfindinginvitesthequestionofwhetherother
responseacrossthestimulithatbestcharacterizesalargenumber aspectsofhigh-levelcognitionmayalsobecomputedinspecial-
ofvoxels(e.g.,ahighresponsetoallcategoriesexceptoneorahigh ized cortical regions. Perhaps the most obvious case here is the
responsetoone-halfofthecategoriesandalowresponsetothe oneproposedbyGallandBroca:language.Surprisingly,despite
otherone-half,etc.). twocenturiesofinvestigation,noconsensushasemergedonthe
11166 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1005062107 Kanwisher
.212.481.95.271
sserdda
PI
morf
5202
,7
yraunaJ
no
212.481.95.271
yb
gro.sanp.www//:sptth
morf
dedaolnwoD

question of whether any brain regions are specialized for lan- allofthesequestionsinnonhumanprimates.Therefore,thedis-
guage(orcomponentsthereof).Theproblemarisesinpartfrom coveryoffunctionallyspecificbrainregionsthatarepresentinboth
aconflictbetweenthefindingsfromstudiesofpatientswithfocal humans and macaques, such as face- and body-selective regions,
brainlesions,whichsuggestconsiderablefunctionalspecificityof opensupfantasticopportunitiestoaddressthebiologicalmecha-
some cortical regions for some aspects of language, versus the nismsofcognitioninawaythatisnearlyimpossibleinhumans.The
findings from the large neuroimaging literature on language, discoveries (72) of face- and body-selective regions in macaque
which suggest considerable overlap between linguistic and non- cortex and the investigation of these regions using the powerful
linguisticprocessing. toolsofsystemsneuroscience(73–75)provideastunningillustra-
Evelina Fedorenko and I have argued that one possible ex- tionoftheinsightsthatcanbegleanedfromworkinprimateson
planationoftheconflictbetweenthesetwotypesofstudiesisthat theneuralmachineryofhigh-levelvision.
the methods that have been used in virtually all prior neuro-
imagingstudiesoflanguage(groupanalyses)arenotwell-suited Origins:HowDoFunctionally SpecificRegions Arise
fordetectingfunctionalspecificity.Groupanalysesunderestimate Developmentally?
functional specificity, because different individuals’ brains are Althoughitisobviousthatgenesandexperiencebothplaycrucial
anatomicallyquitedifferentfromeachother,soalignmentacross roles in the development of all brain structures, it is less clear
brainsisnecessarilyimperfect.Asaresult,functionallydifferent whichoftheprecisedetailsofthecircuitryofeachbrainregion
regions will sometimes be aligned to the same location in the arespecifiedinthegenomeandwhicharederivedfromexperi-
group space (70, 71). Fedorenko and I are now revisiting the ence.Atfirstglance,theexistenceofbrainregionsselective for
question of functional specificity of the language system using faces, places, and bodies would seem to fit nicely with the view
the same individual–subject ROI method that has enabled us heldbymanyofthemostprominentadvocatesofmodularityof
to discover the functional specificity of the other regions de- mindandbrain—fromGalltoChomsky,Fodor,andPinker—that
scribedabove. organsofmindandbrainareinnate(i.e.,theproductsofnatural
Notethatthefailuretodiscoverfunctionallyspecificbrainre- selection).Indeed,itseemsplausiblethattherapidandaccurate
gionsforagivencognitiveprocesscanalsobeinformative.Sup- recognitionoffaces,places,andbodieshadsuchsurvivalvalueto
pose,forexample,thatwediscoverthatnobrainregionisselec- ourancestorsthatdetailedinstructionsforwiringupthespecific
tively engaged in any aspect of language processing but rather neural circuitry of the FFA, PPA, and EBA may have become
thatallregionsthatsupportlanguageprocessingalsocontribute specifiedinthegenome.However,alternativeaccountsarealso
substantially to nonlinguistic functions. Such a discovery would plausible.Quiteapartfromtheexperienceofourancestors,each
offerpowerfulcluesintowhatlanguageisallabout.Specifically, of us modern-day humans probably looks at (and attends to)
we would want to know: what are those nonlinguistic functions faces,places,andbodiesmorefrequentlythanalmostanyother
that overlap with (say) syntactic processing? What would it tell stimulusclass.Giventhatcorticalorganizationcanbeaffectedby
us about syntax, if it shares neural machinery with (say) music experience, the existence of regions specialized for processing
perception, social cognition, or arithmetic? Such possibilities il- thesevisualcategoriescouldresultfromtheextensiveexperience
lustratetheexcitingprospectofdiscoveringcomponentsofmind eachofushaswiththesecategoriesduringourlifetime,without
and brain defined not by the content of the information they anyspecificgeneticpredilectionforthesecategoriesperse.Re-
operate on, but rather by the computational structure of the centevidence,discussednext,suggeststhatthecorticalmachinery
problems they solve. Indeed, evidence of domains of cognition offaceperceptionmaybeprimarilygeneticallyspecified,whereas
that are not computed in cortical tissue selective for that func- theselectivityofanothernearbycorticalregionmaybeprimarily
tion would offer clues about the broader questions of which determinedbytheindividual’sexperience.
mentalfunctionsgettheirownprivatepatchofrealestateinthe
brain, which do not, why some do and others do not, and what Specific Role of Genes in Face Perception. Until very recently, we
thecomputationaladvantagesmightbeoffunctionalspecializa- hadalmostnorelevantdataonthedegreetowhichtheexistence,
tioninthefirstplace(discussedfurtherinSIText). location,andfine-grainedcircuitdetailsoftheFFAweregenet-
In some sense, the discovery and characterization of compo- icallyspecifiedversusderivedfromexperience,leavingthetopic
nents of the mind and brain that are uniquely human are the wide open for passion and polemic. In just the last few years,
mostexciting.Thefactthatourmindsandbrainshaveaspecial however,severalnewlinesofevidencepointtoaspecificroleof
circuitjustforfiguringoutwhatanotherpersonisthinkingtells genes in determining the neural machinery of face perception.
ussomethingdeepaboutwhatitmeanstobeahumanbeing.If First, a congenital disorder in face perception, developmental
weareluckyenoughtodiscoverbrainmachineryspecializedfor prosopagnosia, has been shown to run in families (76, 77). Sec-
other uniquely human cognitive abilities, such as syntax or a ond, face-perception ability is heritable (i.e., more strongly cor-
component thereof, it will provide a similarly thrilling insight related for identical than fraternal twins), and this effect is
into human nature. Further, such discoveries might enable us independentoftheheritabilityofdomain-generalabilitieslikeIQ
totracetheevolutionaryoriginsofthefunctioninquestion.For or global attention (78, 79). Third, the spatial distribution of
example, if we discover cytoarchitectonic or gene-expression fMRIresponsesacrosstheventralvisualpathwaytofacesismore
markersforthebrainregionforunderstandingotherminds,we similar between monozygotic than dizygotic twins; the same is
could then look for the homologous region in primates and in- trueforscenesbutnotforchairsorwords(80).Althoughallthree
vestigateitsfunction. findings implicate genes in face-specific processing, they do not
Discoveringfunctionallyspecificcomponentsofmindandbrain telluswhichgenesareinvolvedorbywhatcausalpathwaythey
thatarenotuniquelyhuman,butthataresharedwithotherani- affectfaceperception.Perhapsthesegenessimplyincreasesocial
mals,offersdifferentscientificopportunities.Mostcurrentmeth- interest and hence, experience with face perception, enhancing
odsavailablewithhumansdonotenableustodetermineprecisely abilitythroughtraining.Orperhapstheydirectlyspecifythede-
thetimecourseofengagement,thecausalrole,ortheconnectivity tailedwiringoftheneuralcircuitsforfaceperception.Evidence
of a given cortical area. (Important exceptions are studies using thatgenesmaybelargelyresponsibleforwiringupmuchofthe
TMS in normal subjects and electrodes implanted for surgical facesystem,withlittleornoroleofexperiencewithfaces,comes
purposesinhumans.)Wecannotstudyinhumansthedevelopment from recent reports that impressive face discrimination abilities
ofagivenregionundercontrolledrearingconditions,andwehave arepresentinhumannewborns(81)andeveninbabymonkeys
nogoodtoolsforstudyingtheactualneuralcircuitsthatimplement reared for up to 2 years without ever seeing faces (82). These
thecognitiveabilityinquestion.However,methodsexisttoanswer findings support the hypothesis that the specific instructions for
Kanwisher PNAS | June22,2010 | vol.107 | no.25 | 11167
.212.481.95.271
sserdda
PI
morf
5202
,7
yraunaJ
no
212.481.95.271
yb
gro.sanp.www//:sptth
morf
dedaolnwoD
ELCITRALARUGUANI
ECNEICSORUEN

constructing the critical circuits for face perception are in the specific to visual word recognition or whether it plays a more
genome. generalroleintherecognitionofanycomplexvisualstimuli.We
Notethatdespitethisrecentevidencethatthefacesystemcan searchedforseveralyearsforabrainregionthatrespondedmore
develop with little or no experience with faces (81, 82), it is stronglytovisuallypresentedwordsthantolinedrawings offa-
nonethelessclearthatexperiencewithfacesdoesaffecttheface- miliarobjects.Althoughwefailedinitiallytofindsucharegionin
perceptionsystem.First,intheotherraceeffect,psychophysical many studies, when technical advances enabled us to scan at
studies have demonstrated what most people know from daily higherresolution,wethenfounditinthemajorityofsubjects(95).
life: we are better able to distinguish individuals from a more Thisregionistiny,aboutone-tenththevolumeoftheFFA,which
familiar than less familiar race (aka “they all look alike”). Sec- explainswhywedidnotseeitwithstandardimagingresolutions
ond, in perceptual narrowing, face-discrimination abilities that (Fig.S2andSIText).
are initially effective on face stimuli of all races or primate Tofurthertesttheselectivityofthisregion,weusedthesame
speciesbecomerestrictedwithinafewmonthsoflifetoonlythe localize-and-test procedure that was effective in characterizing
race/species that the subject has experienced (82–84). This tun- the FFA, PPA, and EBA. In independent tests of the response
ing is entirely consistent with the view that the basic face-per- oftheregion,wereplicatedthefactthatitrespondedseveralfold
ceptionsystemcanarisewithvirtuallynofaceexperience,evenif higher to words than to line drawings (Fig. S2A). Further, we
it is subsequently fine tuned by experience, a phenomenon par- showedthattheresponsewaslow,inthisregion,tostimulithat
alleledinlanguagedevelopment (85,86). sharedmanyofthevisualpropertiesofwords:stringsofdigitsand
What do developmental studies in humans tell us about the lettersinanorthographyunfamiliartothesubject(Hebrew).The
origins of the face system? A long-standing view has held that responsetoconsonantstringswasthesameasthattowords,which
face perception develops very slowly in humans, not reaching suggests that meaning and orthographic regularity are not re-
adultlevelsuntiladolescenceorlater(87,88).Consistentwiththis quiredtoactivatethisregion.Incontrast,whenwescannedsub-
view,severalimagingpapers(89,90)havearguedthattheFFA jects who read both English and Hebrew, we found a high re-
increases in size through and even beyond adolescence. Some sponsetowordswritteninbothlanguages(andorthographies)in
havesuggestedthatthisslowdevelopmentimpliesthatexperience this region (Fig. S2B). Thus, the response of this region is de-
playsacriticalroleinconstructingtheface-perceptionsystem(89, terminedbytheindividual’sexperience.Anevenstrongerdem-
90). This conclusion does not follow, however, because some onstration of the experience dependence of this region comes
developmental changes thatoccur longafter birth are primarily fromabefore-and-afterstudyofChineseilliterates,whoshowed
genetically,notexperientially,determined(asinthecaseofpu- a character-selective response in this region after being trained
berty). Further, more recent behavioral results show that every forseveralmonthstoreadbutnotbefore(96).
aspect of face-specific perceptual processing tested so far (in- Manyimportantquestionsaboutthiscorticalregionremainto
versioneffects,measuresofholisticprocessing,etc.)ispresentat be answered, such as whether it can develop in an alternate lo-
theearliestagesevertested;severalsignaturesoffaceprocessing cation if damage to this region occurs in childhood (97) or
are present within the first 3 days of life (91). Ongoing studies adulthood(98,99)andwhetheritreflectsadiscrete,functionally
inourlabandothersarefindingadult-sizedFFAsinthemajority homogeneousmoduleoragradientofselectivity(52).Whatever
ofchildrenscannedatage5and6years.Thus,despitethewide- the answers to these questions, the current evidence indicates
spread claims to the contrary, current developmental data do thattheparticular selectivity ofthisregiondependsonthespe-
not argue for slow development of face-specific perceptual cificexperienceoftheindividualandnottheexperienceofhisor
mechanisms. herancestors.
Insum,althoughthepreciserolesofgenesandexperiencein Insum,recentstudiesarebeginningtoshedlightontheroles
the construction of category-selective regions of cortex are not of genes and experience in the origins of cortical regions selec-
yet clear, several studies suggest that the face system may be tively engaged in specific cognitive functions. Multiple lines of
largelyinnate:experiencewithfacesmaynotbenecessaryforthe evidence indicate a specific role for genes in wiring up the face
initial development of the face-perception system, although ex- system, yet at least one other region derives its selectivity from
perienceapparentlyfinetunesit.Still,ifnewevidencestrength- experience. Much remains to be understood about how exactly
ensthisview,itwouldnotnecessarilyimplythatallfunctionally genesandexperience shapeneuralcircuits.
specific regions of cortex are constructed in the same way. In-
deed,thefunctionalselectivityofatleastoneregionofthebrain, Conclusions
the visual word form area, is derived from the individual’s ex- WhatagreatprivilegeitistohaveaccesstotechnologythatGall
perience,not theirgenes,asdiscussed next. and Broca never dreamed of, technology that enables us to
discoverfundamentalcomponentsofthehumanbrain.Already,
At Least One Functionally Specific Cortical Region Derives Its theevidenceisstrongforcorticalregionsthatareselectivelyen-
Specificity from Experience. Visual word recognition provides gaged in the perception of faces, places, bodies, and words and
apowerfultestcaseoftheoriginsofcorticalselectivity.Everyone anotherregionforthinkingaboutwhatotherpeoplearethinking.
in our study population has extensive experience looking at vi- Possible cortical specializations for other domains, including
suallypresentedwords,soifexperienceiseversufficienttospecify aspectsofnumber(100),music(101),andlanguage(70),areunder
theselectivityofacorticalregionforaparticularclassofstimuli, active investigation. The possibility is within reach of obtaining
wewouldexpecttofindoneforvisualwords.However,crucially, acognitivelyprecisepartslistforthehumanbrain.Themostex-
humanbeingshaveonlybeenreadingforafewthousandyears, citing aspect of this enterprise is not where each component is
which is not thought to be long enough for the evolution of foundinthebrainbutwhichfunctionsgettheirownbrainregion
acomplexstructure.Thus,ifabrainregionisfoundthatresponds andultimately, why some doand others apparently donot. But
selectively to visually presented words, that would suggest that evenacompletepartslist,excitingasitwouldbe,isonlyafirststep.
corticalselectivitycanbespecifiedbyexperience(92).Whatdoes Awidelandscapeofexcitingnewquestionshasopenedup.What
theevidenceshow? aretheexactneuralcircuitsthatenableeachregiontoconductits
Anumber of studies going back almost two decades have ar- signature function? Why do these regions arise so systematically
guedfortheexistenceofavisualwordformarea.However,many where they do in the brain, and are there ever circumstances in
ofthesestudiescontrasted thecortical responsetovisuallypre- which a region arises in a different locus or moves over after
sentedwordswiththeresponsetoverysimplebaselinetasks(93, damage to its original locus? Is there some hardware constraint
94), leaving unanswered the question of whether the region is (cytoarchitecture,connectivity,proximitytootherareas,etc.)that
11168 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1005062107 Kanwisher
.212.481.95.271
sserdda
PI
morf
5202
,7
yraunaJ
no
212.481.95.271
yb
gro.sanp.www//:sptth
morf
dedaolnwoD

forcestheseregionstoarisewheretheydo?Howdotheseregions tracted in the place area, as suggested by extensive research on
work with each other—and with more general-purpose brain theperceptionoffacesandspatiallayouts?Isitinvolvedonlyin
regions(102)—tosupportcomplexreal-worldcognition?Howdid the representation of the physical characteristics of a face, or
theseregionsevolve,andwhatfunctionsdidtheyconductinour does it contain information about the sex, age, race, mood, or
primateancestors?Caneachregionberecruitedtoperformnew identity of the person? Methods such as fMRI adaptation and
tasks?Forexample,cantheneuralmachineryofsocialcognitionbe fMRI pattern analysis have started to answer these questions,
usedtothinkaboutthemoodofafinancialmarketortounderstand although each method has limitations and progress to date has
whyacomputerprogramfailstounderstandwhatwewantittodo, beenmodest.Satisfyinglyprecisecharacterizationsofthemental
andcanthe PPA beused to understand maps, architectural dia- functionsimplementedineachregionwillrequireextensivefur-
grams,orgraphsdepicting3Dlandscapesofdata? therworkusingnotonlyfMRIandotherbrain-basedmethodsbut
But what psychologists like me most want to do is discover also increased efforts to relate these findings to behavioral and
fundamental components not just of the brain but also of the computational work on the representations and algorithms en-
mind.Forthediscoveriesoffunctionallyspecificbrainregionsto
tailedindifferentaspectsofcognition.
beusefulinthisenterprise,weneedmuchricherunderstandings
oftheroleofeachoftheseregionsincognition.Weneednotjust ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. Many people provided useful comments on this
loosedescriptionsofthefunctionofaregion(e.g.,facepercep- manuscript, especially Bevil Conway, Sue Corkin, Ev Fedorenko, Charles
tion) but precise characterization of the computations and rep- Jennings,EricKandel,HansOpdeBeeck,JohnRubin,LizSpelke,andBobbie
Spellman. The writing of this paper was supported by National Institutes
resentationsconductedineachregion.Doesthefaceareaextract
of Health Grant EY13455 (to N.K.) and a grant from the Ellison Medical
qualitatively different kinds of representations from those ex- Foundation.
1.SchillerPH(1996)Onthespecificityofneuronsandvisualareas.BehavBrainRes 28. MckoneEM,RobbinsRR(2010)Arefacesspecial?TheHandbookofFacePerception,
76:21–35. edsCalderAC,etal.(OxfordUniversityPress,Oxford).
2.Blumstein S (2009) The Cognitive Neurosciences, ed Gazzanica MS (MIT Press, 29. Grill-Spector K, Malach R (2004) The human visual cortex. Annu Rev Neurosci
Cambridge,MA). 27:649–677.
3.HuettelSA,SongAW,McCarthyG(2004)FunctionalMagneticResonanceImaging 30. RotshteinP,HensonRN,TrevesA,DriverJ,DolanRJ(2005)MorphingMarilyninto
(SinauerAssociates,Sunderland,MA). Maggie dissociates physical and identity face representations in the brain. Nat
4.KanwisherNG,McDermottJ,ChunMM(1997)Thefusiformfacearea:Amodulein Neurosci8:107–113.
humanextrastriatecortexspecializedforfaceperception.JNeurosci17:4302–4311. 31. McCarthyG,PuceA,BelgerA,AllisonT(1999)Electrophysiologicalstudiesofhuman
5.McCarthyG,PuceA,GoreJC,AllisonT(1997)Face-specificprocessinginthehuman face perception. II: Response properties of face-specific potentials generated in
fusiformgyrus.JCognNeurosci9:605–610. occipitotemporalcortex.CerebCortex9:431–444.
6.EpsteinR,KanwisherN(1998)Acorticalrepresentationofthelocalvisualenvironment. 32. AllisonT,PuceA,SpencerDD,McCarthyG(1999)Electrophysiologicalstudiesofhuman
Nature392:598–601. faceperception.I:Potentialsgeneratedinoccipitotemporalcortexbyfaceandnon-
7.DowningPE,JiangY,ShumanM,KanwisherN(2001)Acorticalareaselectivefor facestimuli.CerebCortex9:415–430.
visualprocessingofthehumanbody.Science293:2470–2473. 33. PuceA,AllisonT,McCarthyG(1999)Electrophysiologicalstudiesofhumanface
8.ZekiSM(1978)Functionalspecialisationinthevisualcortexoftherhesusmonkey. perception.III: Effectsoftop-downprocessingonface-specific potentials.Cereb
Nature274:423–428. Cortex9:445–458.
9.ZekiSM(1974)Functionalorganizationofavisualareaintheposteriorbankofthe 34. Kanwisher AC, Barton JB (2010) The functional architecture of the face system:
superiortemporalsulcusoftherhesusmonkey.JPhysiol236:549–573. IntegratingevidencefromfMRIandpatientstudies.TheHandbookofFacePerception,
10. AlbrightTD(1984)DirectionandorientationselectivityofneuronsinvisualareaMT edsCalderAC,etal.(OxfordUniversityPress,Oxford).
ofthemacaque.JNeurophysiol52:1106–1130. 35. LiuSRA,ChiarelloC,QuanN(1999)Hemisphericsensitivitytogrammaticalcues:
11. NewsomeWT,WurtzRH,DürstelerMR,MikamiA(1985)Deficitsinvisualmotion Evidenceforbilateralprocessingofnumberagreementinnounphrases.BrainLang
processingfollowingibotenicacidlesionsofthemiddletemporalvisualareaofthe 70:483–503.
macaquemonkey.JNeurosci5:825–840. 36. YovelG,KanwisherN(2005)Theneuralbasisofthebehavioralface-inversioneffect.
12. ZekiS,etal.(1991)Adirectdemonstrationoffunctionalspecializationinhuman CurrBiol15:2256–2262.
visualcortex.JNeurosci11:641–649. 37. SchiltzC,RossionB(2006)Facesarerepresentedholisticallyinthehumanoccipito-
13. TootellRB,etal.(1995)FunctionalanalysisofhumanMTandrelatedvisualcortical temporalcortex.Neuroimage32:1385–1394.
areasusingmagneticresonanceimaging.JNeurosci15:3215–3230. 38. EpsteinR(2005)Thecorticalbasisofvisualsceneprocessing.VisCogn12:954–978.
14. DeAngelisGC,CummingBG,NewsomeWT(1998)CorticalareaMTandtheperception 39. EpsteinRA(2008)Parahippocampalandretrosplenialcontributionstohumanspatial
ofstereoscopicdepth.Nature394:677–680. navigation.TrendsCognSci12:388–396.
15. HadjikhaniN,LiuAK,DaleAM,CavanaghP,TootellRBH(1998)Retinotopyandcolor 40. ChengK,GallistelCR(1984)Testingthegeometricpowerofananimal’sspatial
sensitivityinhumanvisualcorticalareaV8.NatNeurosci1:235–241. representation. Animal Cognition: Proceedings of the Harry Frank Guggenheim
16. ConwayBR,MoellerS,TsaoDY(2007)Specializedcolormodulesinmacaqueextrastriate Conference, eds Roitblat HL, Bever TG, Terrace HS (Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ), pp
cortex.Neuron56:560–573. 409–423.
17. ConwayBR,TsaoDY(2009)Color-tunedneuronsarespatiallyclusteredaccordingto 41. HermerL,SpelkeE(1996)Modularityanddevelopment:Thecaseofspatialreorientation.
colorpreferencewithinalertmacaqueposteriorinferiortemporalcortex.ProcNatl Cognition61:195–232.
AcadSciUSA106:18034–18039. 42. EpsteinR,DeYoeE,PressD,KanwisherN(2001)Neuropsychologicalevidencefor
18. GrossmanE,etal.(2000)Brainareasinvolvedinperceptionofbiologicalmotion. atopographicallearningmechanisminparahippocampalcortex.CognNeuropsychol
JCognNeurosci12:711–720. 18:481–508.
19. ConnollyJD,AndersenRA,GoodaleMA(2003)FMRIevidencefora‘parietalreach 43. HabibM,SiriguA(1987)Puretopographicaldisorientation:Adefinitionandanatomical
region’inthehumanbrain.ExpBrainRes153:140–145. basis.Cortex23:73–85.
20. CulhamJC,etal.(2003)VisuallyguidedgraspingproducesfMRIactivationindorsal 44. MoroV,etal.(2008)Theneuralbasisofbodyformandbodyactionagnosia.Neuron
butnotventralstreambrainareas.ExpBrainRes153:180–189. 60:235–246.
21. VulE,KanwisherN(2010)Beggingthequestion:Thenon-independenceerrorin 45. PitcherD,CharlesL,DevlinJT,WalshV,DuchaineB(2009)Tripledissociationof
fMRIdataanalysis.FoundationsandPhilosophyforNeuroimaging,edsHansonS, faces,bodies,andobjectsinextrastriatecortex.CurrBiol19:319–324.
BunzlM(MITPress,Cambridge,MA). 46. UrgesiC,BerlucchiG,AgliotiSM(2004)Magneticstimulationofextrastriatebody
22. KriegeskorteN,SimmonsWK,BellgowanPS,BakerCI(2009)Circularanalysisin areaimpairsvisualprocessingofnonfacialbodyparts.CurrBiol14:2130–2134.
systemsneuroscience:Thedangersofdoubledipping.NatNeurosci12:535–540. 47. ChanAW,PeelenMV,DowningPE(2004)Theeffectofviewpointonbodyrepresentation
23. PuceA,AllisonT,AsgariM,GoreJC,McCarthyG(1996)Differentialsensitivityof intheextrastriatebodyarea.Neuroreport15:2407–2410.
humanvisual cortex to faces,letterstrings, andtextures: A functionalmagnetic 48. SaxeR,JamalN,PowellL(2006)Mybodyoryours?Theeffectofvisualperspective
resonanceimagingstudy.JNeurosci16:5205–5215. oncorticalbodyrepresentations.CerebCortex16:178–182.
24. KanwisherN,YovelG(2006)Thefusiformfacearea:Acorticalregionspecializedfor 49. Urgesi C, Calvo-Merino B, Haggard P, Aglioti SM (2007) Transcranial magnetic
theperceptionoffaces.PhilosTransRSocLondBBiolSci361:2109–2128. stimulationrevealstwocorticalpathwaysfor visualbodyprocessing.JNeurosci
25. Grill-SpectorK,etal.(1999)Differentialprocessingofobjectsundervariousviewing 27:8023–8030.
conditionsinthehumanlateraloccipitalcomplex.Neuron24:187–203. 50. SaxeR,XiaoDK,KovacsG,PerrettDI,KanwisherN(2004)Aregionofrightposterior
26. SchwarzloseRF,SwisherJD,DangS,KanwisherN(2008)Thedistributionofcategory superiortemporalsulcusrespondstoobservedintentionalactions.Neuropsychologia
andlocationinformationacrossobject-selectiveregionsinhumanvisualcortex.Proc 42:1435–1446.
NatlAcadSciUSA105:4447–4452. 51. CandidiM,UrgesiC,IontaS,AgliotiSM(2008)Virtuallesionofventralpremotorcortex
27. YovelG,KanwisherN(2004)Faceperception:Domainspecific,notprocessspecific. impairsvisualperceptionofbiomechanicallypossiblebutnotimpossibleactions.Soc
Neuron44:889–898. Neurosci3:388–400.
Kanwisher PNAS | June22,2010 | vol.107 | no.25 | 11169
.212.481.95.271
sserdda
PI
morf
5202
,7
yraunaJ
no
212.481.95.271
yb
gro.sanp.www//:sptth
morf
dedaolnwoD
ELCITRALARUGUANI
ECNEICSORUEN

52. VinckierF,etal.(2007)Hierarchicalcodingofletterstringsintheventralstream: 77. Grueter M, et al. (2007) Hereditary prosopagnosia: The first case series. Cortex
Dissecting the inner organization of the visual word-form system. Neuron 43:734–749.
55:143–156. 78. ZhuQ,etal.(2010)Heritabilityofthespecificcognitiveabilityoffaceperception.
53. SpiridonM,FischlB,KanwisherN(2006)Locationandspatialprofileofcategory- CurrBiol20:137–142.
specificregionsinhumanextrastriatecortex.HumBrainMapp27:77–89. 79. Wilmer JB, et al. (2010) Human face recognition ability is specific and highly
54. WojciulikE,KanwisherN,DriverJ(1998)Covertvisualattentionmodulatesface- heritable.ProcNatlAcadSciUSA107:5238–5241.
specific activity in the human fusiform gyrus: fMRI study. J Neurophysiol 80. PolkTA,ParkJ,SmithMR,ParkDC(2007)Natureversusnurtureinventralvisual
79:1574–1578. cortex: A functional magnetic resonance imaging study of twins. J Neurosci
55. O’CravenKM,KanwisherN(2000)Mentalimageryoffacesandplacesactivates 27:13921–13925.
correspondingstiimulus-specificbrainregions.JCognNeurosci12:1013–1023. 81. TuratiC,BulfH,SimionF(2008)Newborns’facerecognitionoverchangesinviewpoint.
56. KanwisherN(2001)Neuraleventsandperceptualawareness.Cognition79:89–113. Cognition106:1300–1321.
57. BaarsBJ,NewmanJ(1994)Aneurobiologicalinterpretationofglobalworkspace 82. SugitaY(2008)Faceperceptioninmonkeysrearedwithnoexposuretofaces.Proc
theory.TheNewScienceofHumanExperience:CognitiveNeurobiologyandthe
NatlAcadSciUSA105:394–398.
QuestforConsciousness,edsRevonsuoA,KamppinenM(OxfordUniversityPress, 83. PascalisO,deHaanM,NelsonCA(2002)Isfaceprocessingspecies-specificduringthe
NewYork),pp211–226. firstyearoflife? Science296:1321–1323.
58. DehaeneS,KerszbergM,ChangeuxJP(1998)Aneuronalmodelofaglobalworkspace 84. KellyDJ,etal.(2007)Theother-raceeffectdevelopsduringinfancy:Evidenceof
ineffortfulcognitivetasks.ProcNatlAcadSciUSA95:14529–14534. perceptualnarrowing.PsycholSci18:1084–1089.
59. PuceA,AllisonT,BentinS,GoreJC,McCarthyG(1998)Temporalcortexactivationin 85. EimasPD(1975)Auditoryandphoneticcodingofthecuesforspeech:Discrimination
humansviewingeyeandmouthmovements.JNeurosci18:2188–2199.
ofthe(rl)distinctionbyyounginfants.PerceptPsychophys18:341–347.
86. WerkerJF,GilbertJHV,HumphreyK,TeesRC(1981)Developmentalaspectsofcross-
60. RajimehrR,YoungJC,TootellRB(2009)Ananteriortemporalfacepatchinhuman
cortex,predictedbymacaquemaps.ProcNatlAcadSciUSA106:1995–2000.
languagespeechperception.ChildDev52:349–355.
87. CareyS,DiamondR(1980)Maturationaldeterminationofthedevelopmentalcourse
61. PinkerS(2000)TheLanguageInstinct:HowtheMindCreatesLanguage(Harper
offaceencoding.BiologicalStudiesofMentalProcesses,edCaplanD(MITPress,
Collins,NewYork).
62. DowningPE,ChanAW,PeelenMV,DoddsCM,KanwisherN(2006)Domainspecificity
Cambridge,MA),pp60–93.
invisualcortex.CerebCortex16:1453–1461. 88. hG uri mll- aS npe vc et no tr raK l, vG iso ul aa lr ca oi rG te, xG .Ta rb er nie dli sCJ o(2 g0 n0 S8 c) iD 12e :v 1e 5l 2o –p 1m 6e 2n .talneuroimagingofthe
63. ChaoLL,MartinA,HaxbyJV(1999)Areface-responsiveregionsselectiveonlyfor
faces? Neuroreport10:2945–2950. 89. wGo itl har ca ai tG eg, oe rt ya -sl p. e(2 c0 ifi0 c7) reD ci off ge nr ie tn iot nial md ee mve ol ro yp .m Ne an tt No ef urh oig sch i- 1le 0v :e 5l 12vi –s 5u 2a 2l .cortexcorrelates
64. LashkariD,VulE,KanwisherN,GollandP(2008)DiscoveringStructureintheSpaceof
90. ScherfKS,BehrmannM,HumphreyK,LunaB(2007)Visualcategory-selectivityfor
ActivationProfilesinfMRI,edsMetaxasD,etal.(SpringerVerlag,Berlin),pp1016–1024.
faces,placesandobjectsemergesalongdifferentdevelopmentaltrajectories.Dev
65. LashkariD,VulE,KanwisherN,GollandP(2010)Discoveringstructureinthespaceof Sci10:F15–F30.
fMRIselectivityprofiles.Neuroimage50:1085–1098.
91. McKoneE,CrookesK,KanwisherN(2009)Thecognitiveandneuraldevelopmentof
66. KriegeskorteN,etal.(2008)Matchingcategoricalobjectrepresentationsininferior
facerecognitioninhumans.TheCognitiveNeurosciencesIV(MITPress,Cambridge,
temporalcortexofmanandmonkey.Neuron60:1126–1141.
MA).
67. SaxeR,KanwisherN(2003)Peoplethinkingaboutthinkingpeople.Theroleofthe
92. PolkTA,etal.(2002)Neuralspecializationforletterrecognition.JCognNeurosci
temporo-parietaljunctionin“theoryofmind.”Neuroimage19:1835–1842. 14:145–159.
68. SaxeR,PowellLJ(2006)It’sthethoughtthatcounts:Specificbrainregionsforone 93. PetersenSE,FoxPT,SnyderAZ,RaichleME(1990)Activationofextrastriateand
componentoftheoryofmind.PsycholSci17:692–699. frontalcorticalareasbyvisualwordsandword-likestimuli.Science249:1041–1044.
69. SaxeR,SchulzLE,JiangYV(2006)Readingmindsversusfollowingrules:Dissociating 94. CohenL,etal.(2002)Language-specifictuningofvisualcortex?Functionalproperties
theoryofmindandexecutivecontrolinthebrain.SocNeurosci1:284–298. oftheVisualWordFormArea.Brain125:1054–1069.
70. FedorenkoE,KanwisherK(2009)Neuroimagingoflanguage:Whyhasn’taclearer 95. BakerCI,etal.(2007)Visualwordprocessingandexperientialoriginsoffunctional
pictureemerged? LangLinguistCompass3:839–865. selectivityinhumanextrastriatecortex.ProcNatlAcadSciUSA104:9087–9092.
71. FedorenkoE,HsiehP-J,CastañónAN,Whitfield-GabrieliS,KanwisherN(2010)A 96. HeSH,etal.(2009)TransformingaleftlateralfusiformregionintoVWFAthrough
newmethodforfMRIinvestigationsoflanguage:DefiningROIsfunctionallyin traininginilliterateadults.JVis9:853.
individualsubjects.JNeurophysiol,10.1152/jn.00032.2010. 97. CohenL,etal.(2004)Learningtoreadwithoutaleftoccipitallobe:Right-hemispheric
72. TsaoDY,FreiwaldWA,KnutsenTA,MandevilleJB,TootellRB(2003)Facesand shiftofvisualwordformarea.AnnNeurol56:890–893.
objectsinmacaquecerebralcortex.NatNeurosci6:989–995. 98. PyunSB,SohnHJ,JungJB,NamK(2007)Differentialreorganizationoffusiform
73. TsaoDY,FreiwaldWA,TootellRB,LivingstoneMS(2006)Acorticalregionconsisting gyrusintwotypesofalexiaafterstroke.Neurocase13:417–425.
entirelyofface-selectivecells.Science311:670–674. 99. InoT,etal.(2008)LongitudinalfMRIstudyofreadinginapatientwithletter-by-letter
74. MoellerS,FreiwaldWA,TsaoDY(2008)Patcheswithlinks:Aunifiedsystemfor reading.Cortex44:773–781.
processingfacesinthemacaquetemporallobe.Science320:1355–1359. 100.DehaeneS,SpelkeE,PinelP,StanescuR,TsivkinS(1999)Sourcesofmathematical
75. FreiwaldWA,TsaoDY,LivingstoneMS(2009)Afacefeaturespaceinthemacaque thinking:Behavioralandbrain-imagingevidence.Science284:970–974.
temporallobe.NatNeurosci12:1187–1196. 101.PeretzI,ColtheartM(2003)Modularityofmusicprocessing.NatNeurosci6:688–691.
76. DuchaineB,GermineL,NakayamaK(2007)Familyresemblance:Tenfamilymembers 102.DuncanJ(2010)Themultiple-demand(MD)systemoftheprimatebrain:Mental
withprosopagnosiaandwithin-classobjectagnosia.CognNeuropsychol24:419–430. programsforintelligentbehaviour.TrendsCognSci14:172–179.
11170 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1005062107 Kanwisher
.212.481.95.271
sserdda
PI
morf
5202
,7
yraunaJ
no
212.481.95.271
yb
gro.sanp.www//:sptth
morf
dedaolnwoD



13-1
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Austin Lim, PhD (DePaul University)
David Graykowski (DePaul University)
Editor: Alexandrina Guran, PhD (Universität Wien)
Think back to your favorite birthday party. several brain areas. Our ability to learn new facts,
Which of your friends were there? What did you recount the events of last week, or to perform
do, where did you go, and did you have cake? new motor skills is the result of learning-induced
Did you get gifts? neural plasticity. In this chapter, we will consider
The ability to perform this task depends different aspects of learning and memory, starting
on our ability to create and recall memories. from the behavioral level down to the molecular
According to our current best understanding of changes responsible for memory formation,
the neuroscience of learning, the underlying as well as some disorders that disrupt healthy
biology of a memory mainly consists of subtle memory processes.
changes among synapses distributed across
Chapter 13 outline
13.1 Patient HM
13.2 Neural Structures Involved in Learning
13.3 Cellular Mechanisms of Learning
13.4 Molecular Mechanisms of Learning
13.5 Disorders of Memory
13.1 Patient HM
One of the most influential case studies in extension). In his early adulthood, he was having
the neuroscience of memory is the story of Patient a tonic-clonic seizure monthly and several minor
HM. HM was born in 1926 in a small Connecticut seizures daily, preventing him from working a
town. He had a mostly regular childhood: taking normal job or living a normal life - despite taking
family road trips, riding bicycles, and learning a cocktail of anti-epileptic medications.
about American presidents in school. Neurosurgeon William Scoville proposed
In his childhood, HM began having a “frankly experimental operation” to treat HM.
severe seizures, possibly the result of a head It was known that most epilepsy originates in
injury. In his teenage years, he started having patches of neurons of the medial temporal
tonic-clonic seizures, the most severe form of lobe (MTL), and HM’s epilepsy was typical in
seizures that produces a loss of consciousness this respect. Scoville suggested to surgically
and convulsions (extreme muscle contraction or resect the MTL. In 1953, Scoville removed about
13-2
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Hippocampus
Figure 13.1 Patient HM at 27 years old.
8 cm of the MTL bilaterally, including part of the
amygdala, and notably the hippocampus, the
seahorse-shaped structure of the brain.
The surgery succeeded at its primary goal:
HM’s seizures were less frequent and less severe.
However, HM was left with a highly unusual and
life-altering side effect: He was unable to create
new discrete memories, a memory deficit called Figure 13.2 The location of the hippocampus
anterograde amnesia. For example, he could in the medial temporal lobe (top). A dissected
not remember what he had eaten for lunch just hippocampus and fornix (bottom left) looks like a
minutes after finishing the last bite. Despite seahorse (bottom right).
being an avid fan of watching the news, HM
couldn’t remember the names or the faces of are different form of memory called procedural
different celebrities or public figures. It was as memory; see below). He was also capable of
if he was permanently living in the present. (In recalling things from his early childhood, such as
contrast, retrograde amnesia affects the ability geography facts he had learned in elementary
to successfully retrieve memory from one’s past.) school.
However, despite his pervasive memory
deficits, HM did not display any deficits in Types of memories
intelligence. His language and speech were The fact that HM’s MTL surgery disrupted
unaffected, and word recall was excellent, as he some types of memories (e.g., memory for facts)
loved completing crossword puzzles and often did while others were still intact (e.g., motor skills)
so successfully late in life, with only the occasional inspired neuropsychiatrists to try to define the
spelling errors. He could learn to acquire new different forms of memory. Much of the research
skills, such as keeping a pen still on a moving was led by Dr. Brenda Milner, who carried out
circular platform, or a tapping task (these skills several behavioral tests on HM to figure out what
13-3
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

types of memories are dependent on the intact Several tests concluded that HM had lost
MTL and which ones can function without MTL. his ability to create new semantic memories. In
The most profound deficit was HM’s one such study, HM was asked to determine if a
inability to create new declarative memories. word was made up or real. He was shown words
Declarative memories, also called explicit with very old origins, such as “shepherd” or
memories, are the pieces of information that “butcher.” On these words, he performed as well
can be consciously declared or stated explicitly. as the control group. When he was shown words
Declarative memories are thought of as a that are made up, such as “phlage” or “thweise”,
“knowing what”. Declarative memories can be he likewise performed as well as the controls.
further subdivided into semantic memory and However, when shown words that were added
episodic memory. into the dictionary after his 1953-surgery, such
Semantic memories are pieces of factual as “granola” or “jacuzzi,” he scored about 50%
information. Some examples include: correct - consistent with guessing at random, as
1. “Jupiter is the largest planet of our solar if he never acquired the knowledge that these
system.” words have a meaning.
2. “Rosalind Franklin discovered the double- HM was also unable to create
helix structure of a DNA molecule.” autobiographical memories. When asked to
3. “The actor Keanu Reeves played the recall one of his birthday celebrations as an adult,
protagonist of the movie The Matrix.” he wouldn’t be able to give any significant details
An episodic memory, sometimes also about the event. Instead, his answers were often
called an autobiographical memory, is the vague and generic.
recollection of a discrete moment in a person’s One interesting observation was that HM’s
life. It can be thought of as “mental-time travel” memory about details from his childhood were
- what was it like when. The following memories still intact. The inability to recall memories from
are examples of episodic memories: the past, in this case, from before HM´s surgery,
• “When I got home, I put my wallet and phone is called retrograde amnesia. Patient HM’s
on the table.” retrograde amnesia was temporally graded,
• “I ordered pizza last night.” meaning that the farther back you examine,
• “In 2019, I went to see my favorite musicians the more complete his memories were. Many
perform live.” of his memories for the two years before his
Memory
Declarative Procedural
Working
(explicit) (implicit)
Episodic
Semantic Kinesthetic Priming Associative
(autobiographical)
Figure 13.3 Summary diagram of some of the major subtypes of memory.
13-4
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Memories how”. Some examples of procedural memories
retained
include, for example, performance of a series of
Anterograde amnesia
motor actions without conscious thought such as
100%
an experienced musician playing a simple scale
50% (sometimes commonly called “muscle memory”,
even though the muscles do not store any actual
0%
Time memory!), or a priming effect (such as when a
Lesion
Memories person sees pictures of bananas, they are more
retained
likely to answer the fill-in-the-blank prompt “b _ _
Retrograde amnesia
100% _ _ _” with “banana”, whereas other people might
guess “bubble” or “badger”).
50%
The original test of procedural memory
conducted by Dr. Brenda Milner was called the
0%
Time
Lesion mirror tracing task. In this test, the patient is told
to draw a third star in between the two stars as
Figure 13.4 In anterograde amnesia, a person is quickly as possible without making any mistakes.
unable to create new memories following a lesion The challenge is that the tracing is to be done
(top). In temporally-graded retrograde amnesia, while watching their hand and the star in their
older memories are better retained while recent reflection in a mirror. Because of these unusual
memories are more likely lost. circumstances, completing this task is difficult.
But over multiple days of practice, people become
surgery were completely lost, but memories
from his youth and teenage years were intact as
much as healthy individuals (there is contention
about this observation, because HM was
taking several anti-epileptic drugs, which may
have impacted memory formation.) From this
observation, memory researchers concluded that
the MTL functions as short-term storage site for
memories, but after some years, those memories
get relocated to other brain areas outside of the
MTL. Currently, the scientific evidence suggests
that memories are distributed across several
networks of cortical and subcortical brain areas.
While HM lost the ability to create new
declarative memories, he was still able to maintain
a different class of memories, called procedural
memories (or implicit memories). They are
unconscious memories, and can’t be explicitly
stated. These can be thought of as “knowing
13-5
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com
srorrE
Day 1 Day 2 Day 3
Trials Trials Trials
Figure 13.5 Patient HM performed poorly on the
mirror tracing task (top), but improved at the task
over time despite having no memory of performing
the task (bottom).

better at this mirror tracing task, completing it
dogs begin to salivate, a conditioned response
faster with fewer errors. Improvement on this
(CR), independent of any food being presented.
task indicates that a person is learning or gaining
Separate from declarative or procedural
some memory about how to better perform the
memories, a different form of memory called
task.
working memory was tested in HM. Working
After practicing this mirror tracing task, HM
memory involves processes of storing information
was able to finish drawing the star about ten times
temporarily while simultaneously manipulating
faster than when he first began. He improved his
those pieces of information. This type of memory
performance within each day’s worth of training,
and he also improved day-to-day. There is
Stimulus Response
evidence that he maintained these skills up to one
year later, despite not having regular training on
this task. Surprisingly, each day Milner examined
HM, she would need to reintroduce herself Food:
Unconditioned
since he forgot who she was. She also had to
Salivation:
stimulus (US)
re-explain what HM was supposed to do in the Unconditioned
response (UR)
mirror tracing task. Hence, while HM was unable
to form declarative memory about the experiment
or the people involved, learning of the procedural
memories and motor actions involved in this task
Bell: Neutral
remained intact.
No response
stimulus
Another type of procedural memory is an
associative memory. Associative memories are
the types of information that we learn through
traditional Pavlovian conditioning. For example,
recall the classic Nobel prize-winning experiment
Pairing of bell with
in physiology conducted by Ivan Pavlov in the Salivation
food
late 1800s. Normally, the presentation of dog
food, an unconditioned stimulus (US), causes
a dog to salivate, a naturally happening behavior,
called the unconditioned response (UR). Dogs
are not particularly interested in the sound of a
whistle: this neutral stimulus will produce a minor Bell: Conditioned
Salivation:
stimulus (CS)
response, such as a head turn and attentional Conditioned
shift towards the origin of the sound, but not much response (CR)
more than that. However, when this stimulus is
repeatedly paired with the presentation of food, Figure 13.6 A CR after exposure to a CS, such as
dogs quickly learn to associate that the whistle in classical Pavlovian conditioning, is an example
signals food. After multiple pairings, upon hearing of an associative memory, one type of procedural
the whistle, a conditioned stimulus (CS), the memory.
13-6
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

can be thought of as a “short-term memory on Trial 1: Prompt 4 8 2 6
overdrive.” Although HM struggled with working Expected response 6 2 8 4
memory immediately after his surgery, several
years later HM performed as well as age-matched Trial 2: Prompt 2 8 7 9 1
control patients on these tasks. Expected response 1 9 7 8 2
For example, a test of working memory
Trial 3: Prompt 8 4 1 1 8 6
is the digit span test, where a person is given
Expected response 6 8 1 1 4 8
a series of numbers to remember, then they are
asked to repeat the numbers in reverse order.
After successfully completing this task, a different Prompt Expected response
series of numbers, this time one digit longer, is
4 3 1 2
1 4
presented to the patient until they first start making
errors in recall. A related task is called the Corsi
2 3
block tapping test, where an experimenter sets
up several blocks on a table. The experimenter
then taps a series of blocks in a specific order,
then the subject is asked to tap on the blocks Figure 13.7 The digit span test (top) and the
in reverse order. As with the digit-span test, the Corsi block tapping test (bottom) are measures
experimenter then makes the series of blocks of working memory.
longer until they make mistakes in the tapping.
Patient HM died in 2008 at age 82 of
respiratory failure. His name was Henry Molaison.
13-7
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

13.2 Neural Structures Involved in
The Hippocampus (HPC)
The hippocampus (HPC), meaning
“seahorse” in Greek, was named based on its
morphology. The HPC is located along the ventral
and medial surface of the brain. The HPC is one
of the critical structures of the limbic system,
a series of subcortical brain structures that are
involved in several different complex behaviors,
such as emotions and memory. The limbic system
Schaffer
is an evolutionarily ancient brain network. collaterals CA1
The synaptic connectivity of the
hippocampus is very well characterized.
CA3
Hippocampal synaptic connectivity was first
Dentate Entorhinal
described by Ramon y Cajal, and is made up Mossy gyrus cortex
fibers Perforant
of three main synaptic connections; sometimes
pathway
called the trisynaptic circuit. First, the axonal
outputs of layers 2 and 3 from the entorhinal Figure 13.8 The circuitry of the hippocampus
cortex make up the inputs into the HPC. This as illustrated by Ramon y Cajal (top) and as a
white matter signaling tract is called the perforant schematic diagram (bottom). Structures are
pathway, and they synapse onto the granule labeled in red and communication pathways are
cells of the dentate gyrus. These neurons send in black.
axons, called mossy fibers, to the pyramidal
cells of the Cornu ammonis (CA) 3 region of the spatial memory whenever we are walking around
HPC. The axonal projections from here, called campus, making our way from one building to
Schaffer collaterals, project into CA1, which another, thinking about the streets you’d need to
are the neurons that make up the output of the cross or the buildings you can cut through. While
hippocampus. These outputs project out to layer the volume of the hippocampus is not a reliable
5 and 6 of entorhinal cortex. While the three indicator of the strength of a healthy person’s
main neuronal projections are glutamatergic, spatial memory, injury to the hippocampus causes
the trisynaptic circuit is modulated by GABA, deficits in spatial memory.
acetylcholine, norepinephrine, and serotonin. To test spatial memory behaviorally in non-
The HPC is involved in spatial memories, human animals, one test that is regularly used
memories involved in navigation of our in rodents is called the Morris water maze. In
surroundings and the creation of a mental map of this test, a shallow pool is filled with an opaque
our world. Spatial memories are developed when liquid, making it difficult to see through. Hidden
we enter a new building for the first time, and we somewhere in this pool is a clear plexiglass
search for a new classroom. We also use our platform, surrounding the pool are different
13-8
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

environmental cues that can be seen from the find the platform decreases. When the HPC is
surface of the water, such as different shapes surgically removed from rodents or inactivated,
or colors. The water is deep enough that when they perform poorly in the Morris water maze.
a rodent is put into the Morris water maze, they Another non-human behavioral test used
have to swim to stay afloat. The rodents swim to assess the capacity for learning navigational
around aimlessly until they find the platform, the cues is the radial arm maze. In this test, a rodent
time it takes for this to happen is recorded, and is placed on a circular platform. Extending from
the trial ends. Over time, the animals learn that this platform are eight or more “arms”, at the
the platform is located near certain navigational end of each is a small dish. In one of the dishes
cues, and on future trials, the animals spend is a morsel of food (“rewarded arm”), while the
more time near those cues, and the latency to other dishes contain nothing (“non-rewarded
arms”). The maze is designed so that the food
cannot be seen from the end of each arm, so the
Camera
animal must return to the starting platform before
exploring another arm. The number of entries
Starting location
into a non-rewarded arms is counted as an error.
Environmental
cues Over time, the animals make fewer errors as they
learn which arm is rewarded and which ones
are not. Alzheimer’s disease model organisms
Hidden platform perform poorly on this task.
Based on the deficits seen in Patient HM
and other experimental manipulations of the HPC,
we conclude that the HPC is strongly implicated
in the process of declarative memories and
spatial navigation. Since some of HM’s memory
functions were still intact, such as procedural
memories and working memory, it is believed that
these functions are independent of HPC function.
The Amygdala
The amygdala is another limbic system
structure found in the medial temporal lobe
adjacent to the HPC. Amygdala comes from the
Greek word meaning “almond,” which roughly
describes its shape. While the amygdala is
often spoken of as a single structure, it is more
accurately divided into several subnuclei, each
Figure 13.9 The Morris water maze (top) and the with different cell populations and functions.
radial arm maze (bottom) are behavioral tests to One broad division distinguishes the basolateral
assess spatial memory. amygdala (BLA) versus the central nucleus of
13-9
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

amygdala (CeA): The BLA contributes to both fear fear conditioning. This test involves putting a
memories and reward processing, while the CeA rodent into a chamber with floors made of metal
contributes more to the physiological response in rods, which are connected to an electric current
emotions as well the perception of emotion. generator. The metal rods can deliver a non-
lethal but painful electric shock to the rodent’s
foot. In this learning paradigm, a combination of
sound and light cues is presented to the animal.
Shortly after, the painful foot shock is delivered.
If the animal learns that the cues are associated
with the negative painful memory, they exhibit
freezing after exposure to the cues. Amygdala
lesions prevent the animal from freezing, while
hippocampal lesions have no effect on this
Figure 13.10 The amygdala are temporal lobe
emotional learning. Changing cellular signaling
structures that contribute to the salience of
in the amygdala alters the learning of fear
emotional stimuli.
conditioning. The foot-shock paradigm is often
used as a non-human model of post-traumatic
The amygdala is strongly involved with the
stress disorder.
formation and storage of emotional memories,
memories or associations that have a strong Inferotemporal cortex (IT)
emotional connection. Both positive and negative
Structures of the inferotemporal cortex (IT)
emotional states are represented here. For
are part of the ventral stream of visual perception
example, a whiff of grandmother’s cooking may
(chapter 7). The IT stores some components of
cause you to reminisce back to a fun childhood
visual memory. We use these functions when
summer. Alternatively, the smell of vomit may elicit
we see a classmate outside the classroom
the unpleasant emotions and nausea associated
and recognize them from our Introduction to
with a nasty food poisoning incident.
Neuroscience class, or when we see a parody of
One non-human test of emotional
a famous painting and recognize the similarities
memory is the foot-shock paradigm, a form of to the original work. A simple behavioral task to
assess visual memory would start by
viewing a series of abstract shapes,
and when a shape appears that you
have already seen, you push on a
button. The human capacity for visual
memory is massive: After viewing
Figure 13.11 In the fear conditioning paradigm, a rodent is put 10,000 images for a few seconds
into a room with medal rods as the floor (left). Then, a sound apiece, people were able to identify
tone is repeatedly paired with a foot shock (middle). When a previously seen image successfully
the sound is played again, the rodent may exhibit freezing about 83% of the time.
behavior (right).
13-10
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

match those facial features with someone they
have seen before, which is a memory related
process.
The parahippocampal place area (PPA),
also found in IT, contributes to visual memories
associated with locations and environmental
scenes. Imaging studies have demonstrated that
activity of the PPA increases specifically when
people view place-related images, including
scenic landscapes like mountains, man-made
structures like campus buildings, or the interiors
Figure 13.12 The inferotemporal cortex is one of rooms, both furnished and completely empty.
of the signaling pathways important for visual To serve as control stimuli, viewing faces or
memories. objects does not increase the activity of the PPA.
A bit more specifically, one part of the IT is Prefrontal Cortex (PFC)
the fusiform gyrus, which has been previously As part of the frontal lobe, the PFC is involved
described in the context of facial recognition. in high order decision making and personality. In
People with prosopagnosia, a visual perceptual the context of memory, neural circuits in PFC are
disorder affecting the fusiform gyrus, can perceive important for short-term and working memory.
the different parts of a person’s face, but have Patients with injuries to their prefrontal cortex
a difficult time putting the whole picture together after stroke, tumors or aneurysm, performed
and matching those features to a specific person. worse on a variety of working memory tasks such
For facial recognition to be accurate, there must as the digit span test. Additionally, people with
be some memory that allows for a person to frontotemporal dementia, a neurodegenerative
Figure 13.13 The inferotemporal cortex (left, sagittal view) is part of the ventral stream of visual
perception, and is likely one site of visual information storage. Within the IT is the fusiform gyrus
(middle), which is specifically activated strongly in imaging studies when a person is shown with a facial
stimulus (right).
13-11
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

disorder characterized by a degradation of the set of circumstances without incorporating and
frontal lobe, often have difficulty with working evaluating the present circumstances.
memory. Habitual action performance is likely
The PFC also has strong projections with related to a variety of neuropsychiatric disorders.
the hippocampus, and these circuits are likely Obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), for
also involved in the formation of hippocampal- example, is characterized by the presence of
dependent memories. recurring, intrusive thoughts, which can lead to
repetitive actions. Commonly observed is the
Striatum thought that one’s hands are unclean, which
The striatum is a structure of the basal leads to repeated handwashing.
ganglia, a series of brain structures that contribute A rodent behavioral test of habitual activity
to behaviors such as motor activity (chapter 10) is the observation of self-grooming, a natural and
and procedural memories. The striatum likely healthy series of stereotyped actions that consists
holds memories involved in habits. Habitual of licking the paws and moving them through the
behaviors help us preserve cognitive bandwidth, fur of the nose, caudally down the body. Mouse
reducing the “mental energy” that is used during models of OCD show excessive self-grooming to
repetitive task performance. The downside of the point where they pull their fur out and paw
habits is that reliance on habitual responding can their skin to the point of injury.
limit behavioral flexibility, and cause a person to Drug addiction is also a striatal disorder.
act in a suboptimal manner, perhaps behaving in Compulsive drug use is often associated with
a way that led to a positive outcome in a previous a series of habitual motor actions that happen
Caudate
Striatum
Putamen
Globus pallidus
Subthalamic nucleus
Substantia nigra
Figure 13.14 Several subcortical brain areas make up the basal ganglia.
13-12
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

before a person experiences the drug effect.
Hypermnesia
For example, in tobacco use disorder, people
Solomon Shereshevsky was one
will perform an orchestrated series of actions,
of a handful of rare, clinically documented
including opening a pack of cigarettes, flicking
cases of hypermnesia, the capacity to recall
the lighter, withdrawing the cigarette and taking
nearly any memory with perfect precision,
a deep inhalation. Some of these behaviors are
even after several years. Remarkably,
likely stored across striatal circuits (chapter 11).
he could “easily remember any number
of words and digits, equally easily he
Cerebellum
memorizes whole pages from books on
The cerebellum is the phylogenetically
any subject and in any language and for
ancient structure found posterior and ventral to
a quite long time at that. Shereshevsky
the cerebrum, and functions generally to help
can accurately quote anything he was
with motor functions (chapter 10). The cerebellum
told ten or twelve years ago.” He received
is involved in procedural memories, particularly
recognition in 1968 when his psychologist
the performance of motor abilities. Learning new
A. R. Luria published a case study in “The
motor skills likely requires changes in the circuit
Mind of a Mnemonist.”
strength of cerebellar neurons.
Today, we would describe
Shereshevsky as being autistic with strong
This list of brain structures involved in
multimodal synesthesia. Also of note,
memory is certainly not exclusive. For example,
he had significant deficits in executive
the orbitofrontal cortex plays a role in positive
function, difficulty with recognizing faces,
emotional memories, and sensory cortices are
and could not interpret abstract ideas.
important for the memories related to the specific
stimuli that are processed in those areas. A single
memory could likely be stored in several brain
areas, much like a mosaic.
13-13
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

13.3 Cellular Mechanisms of Learning
In the late 1800s, around the time when when we repeat a phone number to ourselves
Golgi and Ramon y Cajal were engaged in intense until we have a chance to write it down. It is also
debate about the organization of the nervous easier to encode novel information that “builds”
system, many neuroscientists came to a strange on previous bits of knowledge, or information
observation: the weight of the brain increases that is closely related to other well-established
dramatically over the first 10 years of life, but not information, which is why analogies are such an
much more after that. Even though we learn lots effective way to learn new facts.
of new facts and make lots of new memories in
adulthood, the brain itself doesn’t grow in size. 2. The process that enables memory
So how is it possible to store new knowledge if storing is called consolidation, which makes
the brain is not making many new neurons? the memory more permanent. In 1949, an early
Most likely, new pieces of information are neuropsychologist, Donald O. Hebb, offered an
held in the connections between cells, not just explanation for how changes in synapses could
in the cells themselves. If our estimate of 150 possibly lead to a phenomenon as complex as
trillion synapses per adult brain is correct, then it learning. His theory, published in his text The
is possible that we could store all the knowledge Organization of Behavior, can be summed up in
and memories that we collect over our lifetime the phrase:
through some combination of activity across
certain connections. “Cells that fire together, wire together.”
The activity at the cellular level is believed
to take place on at least three different levels In Hebb’s framework, repeated activity at
enabling us to build, store, and retrieve memories. a synapse within a circuit of neurons acts as a
reinforcer signal that strengthens this synapse for
1. Encoding refers to the ability for brain future communication, making the next incoming
circuits to store some piece of information. In signal more robust. Hebb also implies the inverse
real life, you are presented with countless stimuli is true: when cells do not fire together, they
simultaneously. Imagine walking down a busy weaken their connection. Through fine tuning of
street, and think of the number of different sights, synaptic connections, some strengthening and
smells, and tactile stimuli you experience. Storing others weakening, a lifetime of memories can be
memories is an energetically costly process, and stored across a wide distribution of neurons. After
we are limited in the fact that all of our sensory a memory has been created, the specific circuit of
inputs cannot possibly get encoded. Instead, neurons that represent that piece of information
evolution has preferred to encode stimuli that is called a memory trace or an engram.
are most salient pieces of information, such A cellular process called reverberation
as perceptual cues associated with predators. is thought to be the mechanism that allows for
Alternatively, information that we pay strong consolidation. Reverberation is the process by
attention to can get encoded more strongly, like which networks of neurons fire repeatedly. Each
13-14
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

have negatively impacted memory consolidation
Input
before the surgery.
Consolidation seems to occur
predominantly during sleep. Specifically,
declarative memory is enhanced during non-REM
sleep, while procedural memory is enhanced
during REM sleep. Studies investigating sleep
consolidation are often done by letting participants
learn or perform behavioral tasks, after which they
are deprived of a specific phase of sleep. To wake
participants at the right moment, researchers
commonly use EEG signatures, which are unique
for different phases of sleep: sleep deprivation
early in the night denies non-REM slow wave
To output
sleep, while late-sleep deprivation decreases
time spent in REM sleep. Some speculate that the
Figure 13.15 A reverberating circuit (purple) is a hallucinations we sometimes experience during
series of neurons that are activated repeatedly dreaming are a consequence of consolidation
with the activity of a positive feedback circuit. processes, but it is inconclusive as to what role
dreaming plays in memory formation.
time that circuit is activated, the strength of the
network is increased, meaning that it becomes 3. Finally, for the stored memories to
easier for that circuit to be activated in the future. be recalled, a cellular process called retrieval
Throughout the process of consolidation, happens which brings back the specific engram.
memory traces are thought to become more Retrieval happens for both declarative and
represented in the neocortex and less in the procedural memories.
subcortical structures like hippocampus or The writing of memories can be
amygdala. Recall Patient HM’s temporally graded differentiated from the retrieval of memories using
retrograde amnesia, where he had lost declarative specific priming-related behavioral tests. One
memories in the two years leading up to this example is a vocabulary recall test. Consider if
surgery, and yet his memories from the long past you were given a list of 50 words to memorize,
were maintained. This finding suggests that some words that belong to a handful of different
aspects of declarative memory consolidation conceptual categories (such as cinnamon,
depends at least partially on medial temporal lobe pepper, or curry, which fall under the category
and HPC for a period of time, maybe up to two “food flavors”). When asked to write down as
years, before those memories get stored in the many words as possible from the list using your
cortex more permanently. However, we cannot memory, a test called free-recall, you may be
conclude how long consolidation takes in healthy able to successfully remember about a third of
humans based on findings from HM, who had them. However, if you were prompted with the
pervasive and frequent seizures, which might category titles, a related test called cued-recall,
13-15
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

you would perform much better at retrieving topographical arrangement of these place cells,
those memories, possibly recalling up to 75% meaning that adjacent areas of an environment
of the words. The fact that cued-recall scores do not necessarily activate adjacent hippocampal
are often higher than free-recall scores indicate place cells. The place cells, when firing at the
that there is a distinction between the encoding right times, help the animal create a spatial map
/ consolidation of memories and the retrieval of of their surroundings.
memories.
Retrieval is not a passive function. When Grid cells
an engram is retrieved, it is reconsolidated, Grid cells are located in the entorhinal
which is an act similar to replaying the activity cortex, the main input structure to the HPC.
of the circuit. During this reconsolidation, it is Closely related to the place cells described
possible that some aspects of the memory are above, grid cells increase their firing properties
emphasized, while others are lost. This is likely
the main reason why we experience false
memories, memories that are not true to reality Neuron 1
- one reason why eyewitness testimonies are
notoriously unreliable. We may imagine our good
memories as better than they actually were,
while simultaneously dampening the negative
aspects of those memories. A dysregulation of Neuron 2
this reconsolidation process could lead to the
symptoms seen in post-traumatic stress disorder,
where the negative emotional components of a
particular memory are exaggerated rather than
being blunted.
Neuron 3
Special populations of neurons
An individual memory is likely distributed
widely across several different parts of the brain.
Neuron 4
However, there are a few special populations
of neurons mainly in the MTL that contribute to
highly specific types of memories.
Place cells Figure 13.16 A rat is tracked (left, gray) as they
Place cells are a special population move through an open field. Individual grid
of pyramidal cells of the hippocampus. These neurons spike when the rat passes through
neurons increase their firing activity when the particular areas of the open field (left, red). Heat
animal is in a particular location in an environment, map (right) showing high neuronal activity in
indicating that they contribute strongly to location warm colors (red and yellow) with low activity in
and navigational memory. There is no apparent cool colors (blue).
13-16
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

periodically when an animal is at an intersection or the Tower of Pisa. These concept cells respond
of a “grid” in a wide-open, previously-explored to much more than just pictures: for example,
environment. The grid itself is roughly hexagonal, a Luke Skywalker neuron that responded to
and spans the whole environment an animal is in. a picture of young Mark Hamill (the actor who
The overlap of multiple grids gives the animal an played Luke Skywalker) will also respond to text
idea of the surroundings. The scientific description that reads “LUKE SKYWALKER” and the sound
of grid cells earned three scientists a Nobel Prize of a person saying “Luke Skywalker”. Although
in Physiology or Medicine in 2014. this particular neuron probably won’t fire in
response to pictures of athlete Manu Ginobili or
Jennifer Aniston neurons actress Marilyn Monroe, the neuron might fire
The “Jennifer Aniston” neurons, also called in response to pictures of Yoda or Darth Vader,
concept cells, are a series of cortical neurons indicating that the neuron may encode an even
in the temporal lobe that increase their firing broader concept, such as “Star Wars characters”
exclusively in response to highly-specific stimuli, or “Jedi”, or is a part of a network that encodes
such as the idea of Jennifer Aniston, Halle Berry, concepts related to the Star Wars franchise.
Figure 13.17 Concept cells change their firing pattern in response to the presentation of highly specific
stimuli, such as the character Luke Skywalker (portrayed by actor Mark Hamill; images 1, 3, and 5).
Visually similar but conceptually different stimuli (male brunette actors appearing in film), like pictures
of Leonardo diCaprio (image 2) or Keanu Reeves (image 4), fail to induce changes in firing. However,
visually distinct but conceptually-related stimuli, like the picture of Yoda (a related character from the
same series of films; image 6) may also drive the concept cells to fire.
13-17
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

13.4 Molecular Mechanisms of Learning Stimulator
Zooming in beyond the level of anatomy, Instead of simply giving a single electrical
the substrates of learning can be found at the level stimulation, however, Bliss and Lomo were
of synapses. Synapses change in a phenomenon interested in testing Hebb’s theory about
called plasticity. The word “plasticity” refers to plasticity. If “cells that fire together, wire together,”
a change in synaptic strength, which may be an then perhaps they could experimentally drive
increase or a decrease. This change may persist those cells to fire in a pattern that would
for minutes, hours, days, or in some cases, induce a rewiring of the connections, resulting
even a whole lifetime. When synaptic strength is in LTP. The duo delivered a very intense
increased and remains elevated, we call this long- electrical stimulation, zapping the axons at 100
term potentiation (LTP). A prolonged weakness stimulations a second (100 Hz) for 3 seconds.
of a synapse is called long-term depression This high frequency stimulation (HFS) led to
(LTD). In our current limited understanding of an enhancement of the amplitude of the fEPSP in
plasticity, both phenomena are important for a response to a single stimulus - this demonstrated
healthy brain, and neither one is always good or that LTP was a measurable phenomenon. In a
always bad. different experimental setup, this LTP was shown
It is also important to clarify that both to persist up to one year later! In humans, we
excitatory synapses and inhibitory synapses can theorize that some synaptic connections may
be subject to either LTP or LTD. remain potentiated for our entire lifetime, however
investigating this is in humans is ethically
Long-term potentiation constrained.
In 1973, Bliss and Lomo were the Long-lasting changes in synaptic
first to publish evidence of plasticity using strength, such as the LTP that Bliss and Lomo
electrophysiology. The experiment began at the demonstrated, are made possible through a
hippocampal connections of an anesthetized series of molecular and cellular level changes.
rabbit. They put a stimulating electrode among the One form of LTP results from a change in the
axons of the perforant pathway, at the entrance to types of glutamatergic receptors. Of the three
the hippocampus. A second electrode, capable of classes of ionotropic glutamate receptors, two are
detecting electrical charges in brain tissue, was important for this form of LTP: the AMPA and the
placed among the cells of the dentate gyrus, the NMDA receptors. The AMPA receptors are the
area where those axons release neurotransmitter. glutamate receptors that we generally imagine
By stimulating the perforant pathway, Bliss and as contributing to excitation (more information
Lomo could record how neurons of the dentate in section 5.4). When a molecule of glutamate
gyrus respond. A single pulse caused the neurons binds to the active site of this receptor, the ligand-
to depolarize, a measurable observation called gated ion channel changes and allows cations,
a field excitatory post-synaptic potential mostly Na+, to cross the cell membrane, leading
(fEPSP). The more neurons that depolarize, the to depolarization.
larger the fEPSP would be.
13-18
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Recording electrode
Stimulator
Hippocampal slice
13-19
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com
edutilpma
PSPE
High frequency stimulus
Long term potentiation
Baseline
-15 0 30 60
Time (minutes)
Figure 13.18 Schematic of the recording configuration of Bliss and Lomo’s experiments (left)
demonstrating that high frequency activation of the Schaffer collaterals while recording the field EPSP
in the CA1 region leads to long term potentiation (right).
The NMDA receptors are somewhat more is the crucial trigger that leads to the cellular
complex. NMDA receptors are like the ionotropic expression of LTP. Ca2+ ions activate an enzyme
AMPA receptors because they are permeable to called calcium / calmodulin-dependent protein
cations and therefore excitatory, but they have kinase II (CaMKII). CaMKII itself has many
a few specific functional differences. For one, molecular targets. As a kinase, it’s main molecular
their molecular pore has space for a magnesium action is to phosphorylate proteins. When
ion (Mg2+) to sit in the middle of the ion channel. CaMKII becomes activated, it phosphorylates
Mg2+, like the other ions that we have discussed amino acid residues on the AMPA receptor,
(chapter 4.2), responds similarly to the forces of which enhances their current passing properties,
the electrochemical gradient. Mg2+ is more highly thereby increasing their response with glutamate
concentrated outside the cell compared to the present. Secondly, CaMKII also contributes to
inside, and it has two positive charges, so these cellular mechanisms which result in increased
ions are drawn to the interior of the cell. But, the trafficking of AMPA receptors to the cell surface.
pore of the NMDA receptor is not large enough to Thirdly, CaMKII interacts with the transcription
allow the bulky Mg2+ ion to actually cross into or factor cAMP response element-binding protein
out of the cell membrane. Instead, it stays stuck (CREB), which can then move into the nucleus
inside the ion channel. Mg2+ physically takes up and instruct the nucleus to synthesize more of
so much space that it occludes the movement of the mRNA that leads to increased synthesis of
other ions across the cell membrane, basically the AMPA receptors. Taken together, increases
blocking passage of ions through the NMDA in intracellular Ca2+ postsynaptically leads to an
receptor. enhancement of a signal that persists over the
The other relevant feature of the NMDA time course of hours: The definition of LTP.
receptor is that it is permeable to the Ca2+ ion. But, these NMDA receptors are not
Increases in intracellular Ca2+ postsynaptically activated by glutamate alone. Because of the

No stimulation Low stimulation High frequency stimulation
Mg2+
Na+ Na+,Ca2+ Na+,Ca2+
P
Ca2+
Na+ Na+
CaMKII
CREB
Figure 13.19 Molecular mechanisms explaining postsynaptic LTP. At no stimulation, glutamate (pink)
does not strongly activate the AMPA receptors (purple; left). A single presynaptic depolarization causes
some glutamate to be released, which activates AMPA receptors, causing postsynaptic depolarization
(middle). At high frequency stimulation, significant glutamate release activates AMPA receptors,
strongly depolarizing the postsynaptic cell, which causes the Mg2+ ion to leave from the NMDA receptor
(green). Ca2+ enters through the NMDA receptor, and can trigger long term changes in the molecular
components of the neuron (right).
molecular properties of the NMDA receptors, they movement of cations across the cell membrane.
need two conditions to be fulfilled before these Because both conditions must be met
receptors get activated and Ca2+ moves into the before Ca2+ can trigger plasticity through CaMKII
cell membrane: activation, the NMDA receptor can be described
1. A ligand like glutamate must activate as a coincidence detector. These properties
the receptor. As with other receptors, there is no can help explain why LTP was only observed
activation in the absence of an agonist. after Bliss and Lomo activated the hippocampal
2. The postsynaptic cell must also be slices robustly with their high frequency stimulus
depolarized. When the cell is at positive potentials, paradigm. Strong activation depolarized the
the electrical gradient causes the bulky Mg2+ ion axonal fibers, which caused a significant amount
that is stuck in the pore to be repelled by the of glutamate to be released, activating many of
cell’s interior, which then frees the ion channel for the postsynaptic AMPA receptors. This strong
13-20
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

activation caused the postsynaptic neurons to
depolarize, which expels the Mg2+ ion out of the
NMDA receptor. At this stage, both conditions are
fulfilled, and Ca2+ enters into the postsynaptic
cell, which activates CaMKII, triggering LTP.
Some glutamatergic connections between
neurons contain only NMDA receptors but no
AMPA receptors. Because these postsynaptic
cells do not depolarize in response to glutamate
release, and no current passes through the
NMDA receptor due to the Mg2+ block, these
synapses do not change their activity even with Figure 13.20 Aplysia californica was the model
glutamate release. These synapses are called organism first used to demonstrate the neuronal
silent synapses. As we grow, the number of level changes that underlie the habituation
silent synapses decreases, another aspect of behavior.
brain development.
such as a hungry predator (or an experimenter’s
Long-term depression paintbrush), grazed the siphon, the Aplysia would
Around the same time LTP was being reflexively withdraw their gill, as if to protect this
characterized in the rabbit hippocampus, its vital organ by shrinking away from the threat.
cellular opposite, long-term depression (LTD), However, after repeated brush strokes to the
was also being demonstrated in a different siphon, the sea slugs figured out that the stimulus
experimental preparation. Through the 60s, was completely innocuous, and decreased the
psychiatrist Eric Kandel and his colleagues worked strength of gill withdrawal. Kandel and team
with the marine mollusk Aplysia californica. With suggested that this change in behavior was a
a nervous system of only 20,000 cells, Aplysia is form of learning.
orders of magnitude simpler than the other model Kandel discovered evidence of habituation,
organisms used at the time. Additionally, some the suppression of a normal reflex behavior that is
Aplysia neurons are huge, up to a millimeter in dependent on LTD. To further explore the cellular
diameter, which took away the need for highly and molecular level changes behind this LTD,
precise equipment. they conducted electrophysiological experiments
Aplysia also has a relatively simple on Aplysia. The gill-withdrawal reflex circuit relies
anatomy. It breathes using a half-circle of heavily on two different populations of neurons:
delicate tissue called the gill, which is guarded the sensory neurons that receive somatosensory
by the mantle shelf. They also have an organ information from the skin of the siphon, and the
called the siphon, a small tube that is used for motor neurons that control the muscles of the
moving water through the animal. Kandel and his gill. By using two different tiny glass pipettes,
colleagues began their exploration of memory by they could impale these neurons, inducing action
studying the gill-withdrawal reflex, a defensive potential firing in the sensory neuron, and observe
motor response behavior. When a stimulus, changes in membrane potential of the motor
13-21
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

neurons (a depolarization of the membrane of Repeated brush
a single neuron is called an excitatory post- strokes
Control Habituated
synaptic potential, or EPSP). When the
sensory neuron was activated, they observed
an EPSP in response, since an action potential Siphon
caused release of glutamate that activates
Sensory
post-synaptic receptors on the motor neuron. neuron
However, after the reflex had been habituated,
the same sensory neuron activation caused a
much smaller EPSP in the motor neuron.
Large EPSP Small EPSP
The group went about seeing if they
could modify this habituated response, curious
if a stored memory can be modified by stimuli Motor
neuron
from the outside world. When they paired the
mild siphon touch with a painful electric shock Action Fewer
action
to the tail, the Aplysia began responding with a potentials
Gill potentials
strong motor reaction, withdrawing the gill very
intensely, indicating that the inhibited response
disappeared. They called this observation
sensitization. In electrophysiological studies,
they observed that the EPSP at the motor
Strong withdrawal Weak withdrawal
neuron was much larger following the tail
shock.
On a molecular level, presentation of Figure 13.21 Habituation of the gill withdrawal reflex
sensitization is downstream of the action of was modeled by Kandel using Aplysia. Repeated
a third population of neurons, interneurons brush strokes to the siphon caused cellular level
that synapse onto the motor neurons. The changes that led to decreased gill withdrawal.
noxious stimulus triggers these interneurons
to release the neurotransmitter serotonin, which One important form of plasticity is
activates the excitatory signaling molecule cAMP dependent on the activity of the endocannabinoid
found at the terminals of the motor neurons, thus signaling pathway. During robust post-synaptic
increasing release probability and strengthening depolarization, enzymes such as phospholipase
the gill withdrawal reflex. C or DAG lipase create signaling molecules
called endocannabinoids (eCBs), which are
Other forms of plasticity chemically similar to the primary psychoactive
There are many possible mechanisms ingredient of Cannabis (chapter 11). These eCBs
that can lead to plasticity. Some activity patterns are neurotransmitters that act in a retrograde
may induce a short-term plasticity that does not manner, meaning they are produced at dendrites
last on the scale of hours or years, but rather on and signal to the axons. Expressed at some
the order of minutes or seconds. populations of axons are inhibitory Gi/o coupled
13-22
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

receptors that respond to the presence of eCBs,
called cannabinoid receptors (CB1 is the main
form that exists in the brain). These receptors
inhibit cAMP signaling, which decreases release
probability. This specific mechanism of plasticity Decreased
release
is called endocannabinoid-mediated LTD.
CB1R
probability
Another atypical neurotransmitter, the gas
nitric oxide (NO), also contributes to a similar
form of LTD. The enzyme nNOS synthesizes NO,
which diffuses across cell membranes and can
eCB
activate an intracellular receptor called soluble
production
guanylate cyclase (sGC). SGC changes the
activity of the signaling molecule cGMP, which Elevated
[Ca2+]
can either lead to enhancement or depression of i
synaptic strength.
There are also two directionally-opposite
forms of plasticity that function at the millisecond
timescale, called paired-pulse facilitation (PPF)
and paired-pulse depression (PPD). These
forms of plasticity can be observed by stimulating Figure 13.22 Endocannabinoid-mediated LTD
a presynaptic area while recording simultaneously is a result of a retrograde signal that decreases
from the post-synaptic site. However, instead release probability.
of delivering a single depolarizing pulse pre-
synaptically, these forms of plasticity can only at the same synapse by varying the duration of
be observed by giving two pulses right after the IEI.
each other, usually separated in time by 10 By understanding the molecular
milliseconds up to a second. In response to mechanisms of synaptic release, we can explain
these depolarizations, you can also observe two how PPF and PPD can occur at the same synapse.
EPSPs. Depending on the time between the Recall that increased Ca2+ concentration is an
pulses (called the interevent interval, or IEI) important pre-synaptic intracellular signal that
you may see that the second pulse is a different allows for vesicular fusion and neurotransmitter
amplitude than the first. Dividing the amplitude release (see section 5.2 for more details).
of the second EPSP by the amplitude of the first Generally, pre-synaptic Ca2+ enters through
EPSP gives us a value called the paired pulse voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCCs) that
ratio (PPR). If the amplitude of the second pulse open during depolarization. Delivering a single
is increased relative to the first pulse (PPR > pulse causes some Ca2+ entry, but giving two
1), this is described as a PPF, whereas if the pulses, one right after another, allows for more
amplitude in response to the second pulse is robust activation of the VGCCs thus increasing
smaller than the first (PPR < 1), this is PPD. Both the intracellular Ca2+ greatly, leading to more
of these plasticity phenomena can be observed neurotransmitter release.
13-23
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Interevent interval (ms)
13-24
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com
oitar
eslup
deriaP
20
1.5
1.25 40
1
.75
100
20 40 60 80 100
Figure 13.22 Paired pulse ratio an electrophysiological
measure of short term plasticity.
PPD can also be accounted for by looking
at the localization of vesicles in the axon terminal.
The readily-releasable pool are the vesicles that are
close to the inside of the cell membrane. During a
depolarization of the terminal, these vesicles are the
first ones to fuse. However, the readily-releasable pool
of vesicles can get depleted. On the second pulse,
there may be a small number of vesicles remaining
because vesicles need to be refilled before they
can be released, which makes the amplitude of the
second pulse small compared to the first. This is an
explanation for paired-pulse depression.

13.5 Disorders of memory
Alzheimer’s disease older than 65 and nearly a third older of people
In 1907, Dr. Alois Alzheimer described older than 85 has AD.
one of his patients, a 50-year old woman named AD is divided into two categories, familial
Auguste Deter, whose symptoms included and sporadic. Familial AD is diagnosed when
profound cognitive impairment, memory deficits, a person is in their 50s or 60s, and is strongly
and delusions. After Deter’s death, post-mortem influenced by genetic risk factors. This form of AD
analysis of her brain revealed anomalies: only makes up about 10% of cases. Sporadic
degenerating neurons that contained atypical AD is by far more common than familial AD, and
tangles and deposits scattered between cells. is believed to be caused by a combination of
These reports were the first of a disease we now old age and environmental factors in addition to
call Alzheimer’s disease (AD). It is an irreversible, genetic risk factors.
slowly progressing neurodegenerative condition Several genetic risk factors are linked
that leads to deficits in thinking, behavior, and to AD risk. Apolipoprotein epsilon4 (ApoE4)
memory loss. Specifically, declarative memory is the greatest genetic risk factor identified,
is the first form of memory loss observed in AD where individuals who are homozygous for the
patients. As the disease progresses, procedural e4 polymorphism have a 12-times higher risk
memory loss becomes more apparent. of developing AD than people with the more
AD is a devastating disease that accounts common e3 variant. Additionally, mutations in
for 60-80% of all cases of dementia and is the genes like amyloid-precursor protein (APP),
sixth leading cause of death in the United States. presenilin-1 (PSEN1) presenilin-2 (PSEN2), and
As for prevalence, approximately 10% of people triggering receptors expressed on myeloid cells
Healthy Alzheimer’s disease
Cortex Cortical
atrophy Ventricular
enlargement
Hippocampal
shrinkage
Hippocampus Entorhinal
cortex
Figure 13.23 Gross anatomical changes observed in the brain of a patient with Alzheimer’s disease.
13-25
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

2 (TREM2) are all associated with higher risk of levels of acetylcholine. Unfortunately, these
developing AD. compounds show only short-term benefits for
To this day, only post-mortem analysis cognitive function, and these therapeutic effects
can conclusively diagnose someone with AD. subside over time.
As expected, this raises many issues in terms Pathologically, AD is characterized by
of treating these patients. Currently, physicians the extracellular accumulation of amyloid-
diagnose a patient with AD based on the beta plaques (Aβ) and intracellular
symptoms they presented with. However, new hyperphosphorylated neurofibrillary tau-
techniques to make more accurate diagnoses tangles (NFT).
are emerging, including identifying the presence The amyloid cascade hypothesis,
of biomarkers from blood samples, certain originally proposed in 1992, has become the
functional characteristics as observed in PET leading theory in the field describing how AD
or fMRI imaging, and possibly even through eye develops. The hypothesis suggests that the main
exams! driving factor of AD is the deposition of Aβ in the
An early hypothesis proposed to explain brain, and this in turn leads to neurodegeneration
the neuronal loss and memory deficits observed via cell death, abnormal protein buildup, and
in AD is centered around changes in the signaling neuroinflammation. Aβ is produced from the
of acetylcholine. Early post-mortem analyses cleavage of amyloid-precursor protein (APP),
discovered that people with AD have profound an integral membrane protein expressed by
atrophy of the basal forebrain, an area which neurons. A class of secretase enzymes are
contains a large density of cholinergic neurons. responsible for the degradation of APP. When
The cholinergic hypothesis suggests that the alpha and gamma secretases degrade APP,
it is this loss of cholinergic neurons and the the resulting Aβ protein is likely to clump together
loss of acetylcholine signaling that is the main in unpredictable ways, leading to the formation
pathological driver of AD. The theory is supported of Aβ plaques (pronounced “A beta”). These
by the idea that acetylcholine plays an important plaques can cause neuronal death and lead to
role in learning and memory. Three of the four FDA the cognitive deficits observed in AD patients.
approved drugs for AD are acetylcholinesterase Two major genetic risk factors for AD, presenilin
(AChE) inhibitors, drugs that act to increase 1 and 2, are mutations of the gamma secretase
Beta-amyloid
Beta-amyloid plaque
APP
Secretase
Figure 13.24 Amyloid precursor protein is processed by a secretase enzyme, resulting in beta amyoid,
which may accumulate and form plaques in the extracellular space.
13-26
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

that leads to increased APP cleavage. hyperphosphorylated tau and neurofibrillary
Therapies are being developed to target tangles (NFTs) are also potential culprits in
and control the Aβ protein to mitigate AD disease progression. NFTs are an intracellular
symptoms. Recently an antibody-based drug has pathological marker of AD and correlate strongly
been approved by the FDA. This groundbreaking with cognitive deficits in AD. Tau protein is the
drug is unique from those traditionally prescribed major microtubule-associate protein (MAP) of
because it directly targets Aβ. mature neurons, and helps to function to maintain
However, the amyloid-cascade hypothesis cellular morphology. Excess phosphorylation
does not tell the whole story. For one, there are of this protein causes tau to accumulate inside
patients who carry a heavy Aβ load but present no the cell, leading to neuronal dysfunction and cell
clinical symptoms of AD. More so, in mouse models death. The presence of Aβ increases the levels of
with APP mutations, they develop significant Aβ the tau, and vice versa, adding to the complexity
plaques, but have no accumulation of tau (see and difficulty of treating AD. Tau pathology is also
below) and no significant neurodegeneration. observed in other neurodegenerative diseases
Additionally, there have been several drugs such as frontotemporal lobe dementia and
targeting Aβ that have failed in human trials. Parkinson’s disease.
While these amyloid plaques seem Although most discussion of AD revolves
to be the primary driving factor of AD, around plaques and tangles, it is well known that a
Stabilized
Healthy neuron
Microtubules
Destabilized
Tau tangles
Destabilized
Alzheimer’s neuron
Microtubules
Tau tangles
Figure 13.25 Tau protein is used in stabilization of microtubules.
13-27
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Figure 13.26 On a delayed-response task, a measure of short term
memory, patients with Korsakoff’s perform significantly worse than
either a control population or a similar group of alcoholics.
13-28
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com
sesnopser
tcerroc
%
cacophony of pathological markers are also seen confabulate as a compensatory mechanism to
in AD, including neuroinflammation, oxidative make up for their retrograde amnesia.
stress, blood-brain barrier dysfunction, heavy Destruction of both neurons and glia are
metal dysregulation, mitochondrial impairment, seen in the brains of people with Korsakoff’s
and many more. syndrome. As a result of this cell loss, there is
often shrinkage of the cortex, thalamus, the
Korsakoff’s syndrome hippocampus, cerebellum, and the mammillary
Korsakoff’s syndrome is a disorder bodies, paired structures located at the ventral
resulting from a severe deficiency of thiamine, surface of the brain close to the brain stem,
an essential vitamin that functions in metabolic themselves part of the limbic system.
processes. Dietary thiamine is found in whole Korsakoff’s syndrome can be treated by
grains, legumes such as beans and peas, as giving thiamine supplements and eliminating
well as some meats and fishes. Healthy people alcohol consumption. If treated within days after
with a well-balanced diet get sufficient thiamine, the onset of brain damage, people are expected
however gastrointestinal illnesses can cause to make a complete recovery. However, one of the
an inability to absorb thiamine properly. Chronic major challenges is making a proper diagnosis,
alcohol misuse also impairs the body’s ability since the symptoms of Korsakoff’s syndrome
to take up thiamine, and is often the cause of present similarly to other disorders.
Korsakoff’s syndrome.
People with Korsakoff’s syndrome Traumatic brain injury
experience both retrograde and anterograde A sudden blow to the head is likely to produce
amnesia, as well as severely impaired short- a traumatic brain injury (TBI). TBIs are the
term memory. The patients may experience a most common form of brain damage, with about
very strange behavior called confabulation, 2.88 million Americans in 2014 with a TBI-related
which is the fabrication of false memories emergency department visit, hospitalization,
ranging from subtle to wildly fantastical. People or death. People are exposed to these injuries
who confabulate do not
consciously recognize that Visual task Auditory task
their statements are untrue,
100
and are not intentionally trying
Control
to deceive others, which is why
Alcoholic
it is sometimes called “honest Korsakoff’s
lying”. Generally, confabulation
only happens as a person
90
is trying to recall recent
Increasing stimulus Increasing stimulus
autobiographical memories, duration duration
while their semantic and
procedural memories are less
susceptible to confabulation.
Scientists suggest that people

regularly, such as in automobile accidents, falls, as microglial activation, axonal stretching, and
high-contact sports, occupational hazards such elevated levels of immune signaling molecules.
as in construction or military deployment, among People with repeat head injuries may also
many others. A concussion is a mild form of experience some memory loss. It is suggested
a TBI. Some of the common symptoms that that the damage to the brain creates an abnormal
people experience shortly after experiencing a cellular environment that interferes with the
TBI include double-vision, headache, dizziness, reverberation processes that are normally
nausea and vomiting, and loss of consciousness, important for solidifying memories. Additionally,
which are common symptoms in concussions as TBI decreases hippocampal neurogenesis, which
well. is likely to impair the formation of declarative
Usually in a traumatic brain injury, there memories.
are two simultaneous insults: the coup, which is
the injury when the brain hits the inside of the
Savant syndrome
skull closest to the external force. Shortly after,
Savants are people with “islands
the contrecoup happens, which is the injury
of genius,” knowledge in extreme
when the brain recoils backwards and hits the
specializations, such as ability to calculate
interior surface of the skull opposite of the cause
large prime numbers, identify the specific
of the insult. Following these injuries, there is a
day of the week for any date, or recall
widespread inflammatory response that changes
sports trivia. Many savants have a passion
cellular activity in numerous complex ways, such
for creative endeavors, such as in the
visual arts or musical performance. About
Coup injury Contrecoup
injury 20% of savants demonstrate extraordinary
memory. The prevalence of savants in the
general population is exceedingly low, but
about 1 in 10 autistic people demonstrate
some expression of savant skills.
While most savants are born with these
skills, some acquire them as a result of a
head injury. Orlando Serrell, after losing
consciousness in a baseball accident,
developed a complete autobiographical
memory, able to remember where he was
and exactly what he was doing on any
given date after his injury. Following a
diving accident, Derek Amato developed
prodigious musical talents despite never
Fixed object having taken lessons, improvising on the
piano as if playing through procedural
Figure 13.27 TBI is often characterized by a pair
memory.
of injuries, the coup and the contrecoup injury.
13-29
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

One of the biggest difficulties is that
TBI is very different from case to case, making
development of new therapeutic strategies
challenging. Currently, the best treatment for TBI
is rest. There is still debate about the types of
medications that can help best improve outcomes,
psychostimulants and antidepressants being the
most common classes of drugs used in TBI.
The Open Neuroscience Initiative is funded by a grant from the Vincentian Endowment Fund of
DePaul University.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International License.
13-30
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Cover art: https://pixabay.com/photos/handmade-birthday-cake-dessert-3989069/
13.1 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Henry_Gustav_1.jpg
13.2 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hippolobes.gif
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hippocampus_and_seahorse_cropped.JPG
13.5 https://pixabay.com/vectors/pencil-sharp-school-supplies-153561/
13.6 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Classical_Conditioning_Diagram.png modified by Austin Lim
13.8 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:CajalHippocampus.jpeg modified by Austin Lim
13.9 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:MorrisWaterMaze.svg modified by Austin Lim
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Simple_Radial_Maze.JPG
13.10 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Amygdala.png
13.11 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:202003_Model_animal_mouse_mono.svg
https://pixabay.com/vectors/sound-audio-music-icon-studio-2935370/
13.12 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ventral-dorsal_streams.svg modified by Austin Lim
13.13 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Gray727_fusiform_gyrus.png modified by Austin Lim
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fusiform_face_area_face_recognition.jpg
https://pixabay.com/photos/man-water-wet-male-face-swimming-984504/ modified by Austin Lim
13.14 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:The_structures_of_the_basal_ganglia.png
13.16 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Examples_of_Grid_Cells_with_Different_Grid_Spacing_and_Field_Size.jpg
13.17 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mark_Hamill_(right)_and_me_(left)_(210269249).jpg
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mark_Hamill_(1980).jpg https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Star_Wars_
characters_at_Madame_Tussaud.jpg
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Retrato_del_Maestro_Yoda.jpg https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Leonardo_DiCaprio_2014.jpg https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Keanu_Reeves_2014.jpg
13.18 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:LTP_exemplar.jpg modified by Austin Lim
13.19 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Potential_mechanisms_of_LTP_in_spinal_dorsal_horn_in_vivo.jpg
modified by Austin Lim
13.20 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Aplysia_californica.jpg
13.21 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Habituation.png
13.23 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Alzheimer%27s_disease_brain_comparison.jpg
13.24 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Amyloid-plaque_formation-big.jpg modified by Austin Lim
13.25 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:TauProtein.jpg modified by Austin Lim
13.26 https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/a8/Alcohol-induced_brain_damage_%28IA_
alcoholinducedbr00hunt%29.pdf modified by Austin Lim
13.27 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Contrecoup.svg
13-31
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com



Neuron,Vol.20,445–468,March,1998,Copyrightª1998byCellPress
Cognitive Neuroscience Review
and the Study of Memory
BrendaMilner,*Larry R.Squire,† thateventually ledtotheindependentdisciplineofex-
andEricR.Kandel‡§ perimental psychology.Initsearlyyears,experimental
*MontrealNeurologicInstitute psychology was concernedprimarilywith the studyof
Montreal,QuebecH3A 2B4 sensation, but by the turn of the century the interests
Canada of psychologists turned to behavior itself—learning,
†VeteransAffairsMedicalCenter memory,attention, perception,andvoluntaryaction.
SanDiego,California92161 Thedevelopmentofsimpleexperimentalmethodsfor
andUniversityofCalifornia studyinglearningandmemory—firstinhumansbyHer-
SanDiego,California92093 mannEbbinghausin1885andafewyearslaterinexperi-
‡CenterforNeurobiologyandBehavior mental animalsby IvanPavlovand EdgarThorndike—
CollegeofPhysiciansandSurgeons ledtoarigorousempiricalschoolofpsychology called
ColumbiaUniversity behaviorism. Behaviorists, notably James B. Watson
HowardHughesMedicalInstitute andBurrhus F.Skinner,arguedthatbehaviorcouldbe
NewYork, NewYork10032 studiedwiththeprecisionachievedinthephysicalsci-
ences,butonlyifstudentsofbehaviorabandonedspec-
ulation aboutwhat goesoninthe mind(thebrain)and
Theneuroscienceshavegrownrapidlyoverthelasthalf focusedinsteadonobservableaspectsofbehavior.For
century.Thisgrowthhasbeenstimulatedbytwoimpor- behaviorists, unobservable mental processes, espe-
tantdevelopments. First,molecular biology has trans- cially abstractions like perception, selective attention,
formedcellularneurobiologyandhasledtoanewcon- and memory, were deemed inaccessible to scientific
ceptualframeworkforsignaling,amolecularframework study. Instead, behaviorists concentrated on examin-
thatencompassesnotonlysignalingin nervecellsbut ing—objectively and precisely—the relationship be-
inall thecellsof thebody.Second,workonbrainand tween specific physical stimuli and observable re-
cognition, which was traditionally associated with a sponses in intact animals. Their early successes in
numberofdifferentdisciplines,hasmergedintoasingle rigorouslystudyingsimpleformsofbehavior,including
discipline:cognitiveneuroscience.Thishasprovideda learning, encouraged them to treat all processes that
new framework for the study of memory, perception, intervene between the stimulus (input) and behavior
action,language,andperhapsevenconsciousawareness. (output) as irrelevant to a scientific study of behavior.
Inthisreview, we willconsider thesecond develop- Thus,behaviorismlargelyignoredmentalprocesses.As
ment by focusing on one aspect of cognitive neuro- a result,the science ofbehavior was defined in terms
science:recentprogressinmemoryresearch.Insodo- ofthelimitedtechniquesusedtostudyit.Thisemphasis
ing,wealsowant toconsider thebroaderquestion:to reduced the domain of experimental psychology to a
whatdegreecanthesetwoindependentanddisparate restricted set ofproblems,and itexcluded fromstudy
strands—molecularneurobiologyandcognitiveneuro- some ofthemostfascinatingfeaturesofmental life.
science—be united? Can molecular biology enlighten By the 1960s, it was not difficult for the founders
thestudyofcognitiveprocesses,suchaslearningand of cognitive psychology—George Miller, Ulric Neisser,
memory,asithasotherareasofbiology,suchasdevel- Herbert Simon, and others—to convince the scientific
opment? In turn, can cognitive neuroscience define community of the narrowness of behaviorism. These
novelphenomenathatwillleadtoacompletelynewset earlycognitivepsychologists,buildingontheearlierevi-
ofmolecularmechanismsandinsights? dence from Gestalt psychology, European neurology,
and workbythe BritishpsychologistFrederic Bartlett,
TheEmergenceof CognitiveNeuroscience soughttodemonstratethatourknowledgeoftheworld
Cognitiveneuroscienceoriginatedintwodisciplines:in isbasedonourbiologicalapparatusforperceivingthe
psychology, in the development of rigorous methods world, and that perception is a constructive process
for analyzing behavior and cognition, and in systems dependent not only on the information inherent in a
neurobiology, in the effort to understand the structure stimulusbut alsoonthemental processingoftheper-
and function of neuronal circuits of the sensory and ceiver. Thus,cognitivepsychology wasconcernednot
motor systems of the brain. The fusion of these two simplywithspecifyingtheinputandoutputforaparticu-
disciplineswasfacilitatedaswellbythe emergenceof larbehaviorbutalsowithanalyzingtheprocessbywhich
acoherentneuroscience—aninterdisciplinaryapproach sensoryinformationistransformedintoperceptionand
tothenervoussystemthatencouragedtheideathatthe action—thatis,withevaluatinghowastimulusleadsto
techniquesandconceptsofneurobiologyandsystems aparticularbehavioralresponse.Inredirectingscientific
neuroscience mightbe usefullyapplied tothe analysis attentiontomentaloperations,cognitivepsychologists
ofcognition. focusedoninformationprocessing,ontheflowofsen-
Untilthebeginningofthenineteenthcentury,thestudy soryinformationfromsensoryreceptorstoitseventual
ofnormalmentalactivitywasapartofphilosophy,and useinmemoryandaction.Itwasimplicitinthecognitive
thechiefmethodforunderstandingthemindwasintro- approachtobehaviorthateachperceptualormotoract
spection.Bythemiddleofthenineteenthcentury,intro- hasaninternalrepresentationinthebrain:arepresenta-
spectionbegantogivewaytoexperimentalapproaches tionofinformation inpatternsofneuralactivity.
Oncecognitivepsychologistsacknowledgedthatin-
§Towhomcorrespondenceshouldbeaddressed. ternal representations are an essential component of

Neuron
446
behavior, they had to cometo grips with the fact that of information about the organization and anatomy of
most mental processes were still largely inaccessible higherfunctions,includingmemory.Lesionstudieshave
to experimental analysis. Without direct accessto the shown that cognition is not unitary but that there are
neuralsubstratesofinternalrepresentationsitwasdiffi- severalcognitivesystems,eachwithindependentinfor-
cult,ifnotimpossible,tounderstandthepathfromper- mation-processing modules. For example, the visual
ceptiontoaction.Ataboutthistime,theworkofVernon systemofprimates,aprototypicalcognitivesystem,has
Mountcastle on somatic sensation, David Hubel and specialized anatomical pathwaysfor processing infor-
Torsten Wiesel on vision, and Edward Evarts on the mationaboutcolor,form, andmovement.
controlofmovementinauguratedtheneuronalanalysis Finally,computationalsciencehasmadeadistinctive
of perception and voluntary action. Moreover, during contributiontocognitiveneuroscience.Computersmade
the 1970s, Evarts and Mountcastle developed tech- itpossibletomodeltheactivityoflargepopulationsof
niques for studying the activity of single cells in the neuronsandto begintotestideas abouthow specific
brainsofawake,behavingmonkeys.Intheirhands,and componentsofthebraincontributetoparticularcogni-
inworkthatfollowedbyRobertWurtz,ApostolosGeor- tive processes. Tounderstand theneural organization
gopoulos, William Newsome, and others, single-unit ofacomplexbehaviorlikespeech,wemustunderstand
studiesinmonkeysledtothefirstcorrelationsbetween notonlythepropertiesofindividualcellsandpathways
cognitiveprocesses(suchasperception,attention,and but also the network properties of functional circuits
decisionmaking)andpatternsoffiringofindividualcells in the brain. While network properties arise from the
in specific brain regions. This work changed the way properties of individual neurons in the network, they
behaviorwasstudiedbothinexperimentalanimalsand need not be explainable in terms of the behavior of
in humans;the focusnowwason theinformationpro-
individualcells. Computationalapproaches are helpful
cessinginthe brainthatleadsto behavior.
for characterizing the system as whole, for obtaining
Theneed forgreater anatomical knowledgeled to a
formal descriptions of what the system is capable of
renaissance of neuroanatomy,evident in the develop-
doing,andfordetermininghowtheinteractingconstit-
ment of new techniques for tracing connections be-
uentelementsaccountforsystemproperties.
tweenneuronsbySanfordPalayattheNIH,WalleNauta
Thisreviewfocusesonthetopicofmemory,butone
at MIT, Matthew and Jennifer LaVail at Harvard, and
aspect of cognitive neuroscience. We have not at-
Max Cowan at Washington University. The search for
temptedtodocumentfullytheremarkableprogressthat
newneuroanatomical methodsandtheneed tobridge
has been achieved in our understanding of how the
anatomy andfunction led to the application of neuro-
nervoussystemlearnsandremembers.Rather,we fo-
imagingtechniques(positronemissiontomography[PET]
cusontwokeycomponentsinthestudyofmemory,as
scanning and functional magnetic resonance imaging
viewedthroughtheworkthatthethreeofushavecarried
[MRI])to cognitiveproblems.This majoradvance,pio-
outwithourcolleaguesduringthepastseveraldecades.
neeredbyMarcusRaichle andMichaelPosnerandby
Thefirst component isconcerned withanalyzing what
SeijiOgawa, KenKwong,andothers,madeitpossible
memoryis,where itis stored, andwhatbrain systems
torelatechangesinactivityinlargepopulationsofneu-
are involved. This is the systems problemof memory.
ronstospecificcognitiveactsinlivinghumans.Bycom-
The second component of memory is concerned with
paring the results of cellular recordings in nonhuman
analyzinghowmemory isstored.Thisis themolecular
primatesandtheresultsofneuroimaginginhumans,it
hasbecomepossibletostudydirectlytheneuralcorre- problemofmemory.
latesofsensoryprocessing,motoractions,andcogni-
tive processes.
WhereAre MemoriesStored?
Inthe1960sand1970s,therewasalsorenewedinter-
The question of where memory is stored emerged at
estinthetraditionaldisciplineofneuropsychology.Early
the beginningofthe 19thcentury aspart ofthe larger
students of brain and behavior like Karl Lashley and
question—to what degree can any mental process be
Donald Hebbused the term neuropsychology broadly
localizedwithin thebrain? Thefirst personto address
to encompassstudies ofexperimentalanimalsaswell
this question was Franz Joseph Gall, who made two
asstudiesofhumans.Inthissense,cognitiveneurosci-
enceisthemodernforumforthesametopicsandissues majorconceptualcontributions.First,Gallattemptedto
thatengaged LashleyandHebbearlierin thiscentury. abolish mind–brain dualism. He argued, based on his
Studies ofpatientswithbrain injuryor diseasethataf- anatomical studies, that the brain is the organ of the
fects mental functionhave always been a vital part of mind.Second,heappreciated thatthecerebral cortex
neuropsychology, andsuch studiesformed oneofthe isnothomogenousbutcontainsdistinctivecentersthat
foundations ofcognitiveneuroscience. control specific mental functions. Gall therefore pro-
As first clearly shown for language by Pierre Paul posedtheideaofcorticallocalization.Gallassertedthat
Brocain1863,patientswithlesionsofspecificregions thebraindoesnotactasaunitaryorganbutisdivided
ofthebrainexhibitquitespecificcognitivedeficits.Fol- intoatleast27faculties(otherswereaddedlater),each
lowingBrocaandWernicke,theneuropsychologicalat- correspondingtoaspecificmental faculty.Hethought
temptatregionallocalizationremainedstronginEurope that even the most abstract and complex of human
and in Canada but was in good part neglected in the traits,suchasgenerosityandsecretiveness,arelocal-
UnitedStates,withtheexceptionoftheworkofArthur izedtodiscreteareas ofthebrain.
Benton, Hans-Lukas Teuber, and NormanGeschwind. Gallwasnotanexperimentalist.Herejectedthestudy
Asweshallsee,continuingstudyofthebehavioralcon- ofneurologicallesionsandthesurgicalmanipulationof
sequences ofbrain lesions provedto be arichsource experimentalanimals andinstead attempted to locate

Review:Milner,Squire,andKandel
447
Figure1. HebbandPenfield
D.O.Hebb(right)andWilderPenfield(left)in
1958ontheoccasionofHebbdeliveringthe
24thAnnualHughlingsJacksonlectureatthe
MontrealNeurologicalInstitute.
mentalfaculties byexaminingthesurface oftheskulls with the sizeof the cortical arearemoved,notwith its
of individuals well endowed with particular functions. specificlocation(Lashley,1929).Manyyearslater,with
Perhapsnotsurprisingly,withthisapproachhemisiden- additional experimentalwork, it waspossible to arrive
tifiedthefunctionofmostpartsofthecortex.Thisana- at a differentunderstanding ofLashley’s famous con-
tomically oriented approach to personality Gall called clusion.
organology. Later, Gall’s associate, Gaspard Spurz- Perhaps the first effective answer to Lashley came
heim,adoptedthebetter-knowntermphrenologytode- fromDonaldHebb(Figure1,right).InhisbookTheOrga-
scribethisapproach. nizationofBehavior,Hebb(1949)convincedmanythat
Gall’sideaswere subjectedtoexperimentalanalysis it was possible to think seriously aboutthe brain pro-
byPierreFlourensinFranceinthelate1820s.Flourens cessesunderlyingmemory.Hedevelopedconcretepro-
attemptedtoisolatethecontributionsofdifferentparts posals basedonbiologicalfacts,taking intoconsider-
ofthenervoussystemtobehaviorbyremovingfromthe ation the neuronal circuitry that might contribute to
brains of experimental animals the functional centers memorystorage.ToexplainLashley’sresultthatlearn-
identified by Gall. From these experiments, Flourens ingcouldnotbelocalizedtoasinglebrainregion,Hebb
concluded that individual sites in the brain are not suggested that assemblies of cells work together to
sufficientforspecificbehaviorssuchassexualbehavior represent information and that these assemblies are
and romantic love and that all regions of the brain— distributed over large areas of cortex.Sufficient num-
especially thecerebral hemispheres ofthe forebrain— bersofinterconnectedcellswillsurvivemostlesionsto
participate inevery mentalfunction. Heproposedthat ensure that information can still be represented. The
any partofthecerebral hemisphereis abletoperform ideaofadistributedmemorystorewasfarsighted.With
allthefunctionsofthe hemisphere.Injury toaspecific theaccumulationofadditionalevidence,ithasbecome
areaofthecerebralhemisphereshouldthereforeaffect apparentthatnosinglememorycenterexists,andmany
allhigherfunctionsequally. partsofthenervoussystemparticipateintherepresen-
Despite the findings of Broca and Wernicke on the tationofany singleevent.
localization of language, the ensuing debate between Hebb influencedmany students and colleagues—in
cortical localization and equipotentiality in cognitive particular, Brenda Milner, who in 1957 described the
function dominated thinking about mental processes, remarkable patient H. M. (Scoville and Milner, 1957).
includingmemory,wellintothefirsthalfofthetwentieth H. M. hadsustainedabilateralresectionof themedial
century.Forexample,intheperiodfrom1920 to1950, structuresofthetemporallobein1953torelievesevere
this dispute could be followed in the work of Karl epilepsy. Itwasimmediatelyevident followingthesur-
Lashley,perhaps thedominantfigureinAmericanneu- gerythatH.M.hadaveryprofoundimpairmentofrecent
ropsychology in the first half of this century. Lashley memory in the apparent absence of other intellectual
explored the surface of the cerebral cortex in the rat, loss (Scoville, 1954).He could not remember what he
systematically removing different cortical areas. In so hadforbreakfast,andhecouldnotfindhiswayaround
doing, he failed repeatedly to identify any particular thehospitalorrecognizemembersofthehospitalstaff
brain region that was special to or necessary for the (except Scoville,whomhehadknownformanyyears).
storage of memory. Based on these experiments, It seemedasthough hislife fromthe surgeryonwards
Lashley formulated the law of mass action, according wasnotcontributingtohisstoreofknowledge.Hewas
towhichtheextentofthememorydefectwascorrelated abletoholdimmediateimpressionsinhismind,butas

Neuron
448
soon as his attention was diverted they were lost. In to that of Penfield’s two patients, except that it was
contrast, old memoriesfrom his childhood seemedto moresevere.Again,therehadbeennointellectualloss;
be intact. in fact, H. M.’sIQ had risen postoperatively, from104
In fact, the encounter with H. M. was not the first to 117, presumably because he was having far fewer
encounterwiththiskindofmemoryimpairment.During seizures.Hiscapacityforsustained attentionwasalso
theearly1950s,WilderPenfield(Figure1,left)beganto remarkable. Thus, Milner showed that he could retain
carry out unilateral removals of parts of the frontal or the number 584for atleast 15 minutesby continuous
temporallobeasatreatmentforpatientswithlocalized rehearsal, combining and recombining the digits ac-
injury causing seizures. The temporal-lobe removals cordingtoanelaboratemnemonicscheme,butthemo-
typically included the anterior temporal neocortex to- ment his attention was diverted by a new topic, the
getherwiththeuncus,amygdala,andanteriorparahip- wholeeventwasforgotten.
pocampalgyrusandhippocampusonthemedialaspect H.M.’ssuccessinrememberingathree-digitnumber
ofthehemisphere.MilnerandPenfieldfoundthatthese for15minutesintheabsenceofdistractionwasatfirst
removalsproducedatmostmildmaterial-specificmem- sight consistent with Drachman’s view that amnesics
orydeficitsthatvariedinkindwiththesideofthelesion. can hold a simple memorandum indefinitely provided
But,unexpectedly,MilnerandPenfieldencounteredtwo thatnointerferingactivityclaimstheirattention(Drach-
patients with asevere,persistent,and generalizedim- man and Arbit, 1966).Yet it wasalready clear thatfor
pairmentofrecentmemory,followingaremovallimited H.M.verbal rehearsalplayedakeyroleinthisholding
to the left temporal lobe. Because both patients had process. In contrast, certain simple nonverbal stimuli
undergone extensivepreoperative testing, it was easy were forgotten by him within less than a minute. The
toestablishthatthiswasaselectiveimpairmentofmem- evidenceforthiscomesfromdelayedpaired compari-
ory, with no accompanying intellectual loss (Penfield sonanddelayedmatchingstudies.
andMilner,1958).Theimpairmentwasmanifestedclini- In 1959, Konorski described a method for testing
callyasaprofoundanterogradeamnesia,suchthatthe memory ofsingle events,which waslater adapted for
experiences ofdailylife wereforgottenassoonasthe work with human subjects by Stepien and Sierpinski
focusofattentionshiftedtoanewtopic.Inaddition,one (1960).Thistechnique,calledbyMilner“delayedpaired
patient showed a retrogradeamnesia covering salient comparison,”consistsofpresentingtwostimuliinsuc-
events of the preceding few months and the other cession,separatedbyashorttimeinterval.Thesubject
showedaretrogradeamnesiacoveringthe4preceding mustthen indicatewhether the secondstimulusis the
years. sameasordifferentfromthefirst.Thismeansthatsub-
Toaccountforthisunexpectedmemoryloss,Milner jectsmust retain animpression ofthe first stimulus in
andPenfield(1955)hypothesizedthatineachcasethere ordertocomparethesecondonewithit.Taskdifficulty
musthavebeenapre-existing,butundetected,atrophic may be increased bylengthening the intratrial interval
lesioninthehippocampalregionoftheoppositehemi- orbyintroducinganintratrialdistraction. Prisko(1963;
sphere,sothatwhenthesurgeonremovedtheanterior citedbyMilner,1972)usedtheKonorskimethodtodem-
hippocampus and parahippocampal gyrus in the left onstrate H. M.’s rapid forgetting of simple perceptual
hemisphere,heeffectivelydeprivedthepatientsofme- material.Shesampledfivedifferentsetsofstimuli(three
dial temporal-lobe functionbilaterally. Thereason that visualandtwo auditory),eachset constitutingasepa-
MilnerandPenfieldfocusedonthehippocampalregion rate task. Thestimuli usedwere clicks, tones,shades
wasthatonepatient,P.B.,hadhadhistemporallobec- ofred,lightflashes,andnonsensepatterns.Atleastfive
tomyintwostages,anditwasonlyafterremovalofthe valueswereassignedtoeachvariable,topreventasfar
medialstructuresofthetemporallobethatthememory as possible the use of verbal mediation to bridge the
losswasseen.Theirhypothesiswasconfirmed9years retentioninterval.Allpairedstimuliwereeasilydiscrimi-
later,whenP.B.diedofapulmonaryembolismandthe nable at zero intratrial delay. These proved to be ex-
autopsyfindingsrevealedthepresenceoflong-standing tremelyeasytasksfornormalsubjects,whorarelymade
extensiverighthippocampalatrophy, whereastherest errorsevenwitha60-seconddelayandaninterpolated
ofthe righttemporallobe,includingtheamygdalaand distraction. Incontrast, H. M. performed all tasks well
theparahippocampal gyrus,showednosignificantab- atzerodelay, butwithincreasingintratrialintervalshis
normality.Incontrast,ontheoperated(left)side,the22 performance deteriorated sharply, so that at the 60-
mmofthehippocampusthatremainedappearedtobe seconddelayscoreswereapproachingthechancelevel
normal (PenfieldandMathieson,1974). andwerenotfurther impairedbydistraction.
Milnerand Penfieldreportedthese two casesatthe Subsequently, Sidman, Stoddard, and Mohr (1968)
1955meetingoftheAmericanNeurologicalAssociation confirmedPrisko’sfindings,usingadelayedmatching-
in Chicago, andScoville read their abstract.He called to-sampletechniquethatallowedtheplottingofdiscrim-
Penfieldandsaidthathethoughthehadseenasimilar inationgradientstoshow howfar thesubject’s choice
memorydisturbanceinapatientofhis(H.M.)inwhom ofamatchingstimulusdeviatesfromthesamplestimu-
hehadcarried outabilateralmedial temporal-lobere- lusastheintratrial intervallengthens.Inthenonverbal
section,alsoinanattempttocontrolepilepticseizures. formoftheirtask,H.M.wasrequiredtoindicatewhich
Penfield asked Milner if she would like to go downto oneofeightellipsesmatchedthesamplestimulus.With
Hartford, Connecticut to study the patient, and thatis zerodelayhechosecorrectlymostofthetime,showing
how the memory deficitin H. M. became morewidely anormaldiscriminationofaxis-ratios,butwithincreas-
known. ingdelayshisperformancedeteriorateduntil,at32sec-
Clinically,H.M.’smemorydisorderappearedidentical onds,thesamplenolongerexertedanycontroloverhis

Review:Milner,Squire,andKandel
449
Figure2. H.M.ShowedImprovementinaTaskInvolvingLearningSkilledMovements
Inthistest,hewastaughttotracealinebetweenthetwooutlinesofastar,startingfromthepointS(Figure2A),whileviewinghishandand
thestarinamirror.Heshowedsteadyimprovementoverthe3daysoftesting,althoughhehadnoideathathehadeverdonethetaskbefore.
(ThegraphinFigure2Bplotsthenumberoftimes,ineachtrial,thathestrayedoutsidetheboundariesashedrewthestar.)Adaptedfrom
Milner(1962).
choice.Incontrast,H.M.hadnodifficultywithaverbal reaches the points of the star,one tends to move the
versionofthetask,whichrequiredthematchingofcon- hand in the wrong direction. Eventually, with practice,
sonanttrigrams.However,aswithothershort-termver- wecanalllearntodrawtheoutlineofastarinamirror.
bal memory tasks,hesucceeded onlybyconstant re- It is anew sensorimotorskill, a visual-motor skill, and
hearsal;his lips could beseen moving throughoutthe it is acquired across many trials. Milner was able to
delayperiod. showthatH.M.couldlearnthatkindoftaskquitewell.
These and other related studies (Milner and Taylor, ShetookH.M.through30trialsofmirrordrawingspread
1972)concurinshowingthatH.M.canregisterpercep- over 3 days, and heexhibited atypical learning curve
tual information normally, but that the information (Figure 2B).Yet attheendhehadnoideahehadever
ceasesto be available tohim withinabout30–40 sec- done themirror drawingtask before:thiswaslearning
onds.Milner(1972)suggestedthatsuchresultssupport withoutanysenseoffamiliarity.Nowadays,wearewell
thedistinctionbetweenaprimarymemoryprocesswith awarethat suchdissociationsare possible followinga
a rapid decay and an overlapping secondary process discretebrainlesion,butforMilner,lookingatitforthe
first time,itwasquiteastonishing.Herfindingcontrib-
(impaired in H. M.) by which the long-term storage of
utedsomeoftheearlyevidencethatthereismorethan
informationis achieved.
onememorysysteminthe brain.
Interestingly, even before the studyof patientH. M.
ThereAreMultipleMemorySystemsinthe Brain
inauguratedempiricalworkonthedifferentmemorysys-
H. M.’sfailure on delayedmatchingand delayedcom-
tems ofthebrain,similarideashad beenproposedby
parisontasks,whichassessmemoryafterasinglepre-
philosophersandpsychologistsonthebasisofintuition
sentation,didnotruleoutthepossibility thathemight
andintrospection.Forexample,in1949,GilbertRyle,a
becapableofsomelearningwithintensivepractice,or
philosopherofmindatOxford,proposedtheexistence
indeed that certain kinds of learning might take place
oftwo typesofknowledge:knowinghow, asin knowl-
atanormal rate.Accordingly, Milnerand herstudents
edgeofmotorskills,andknowingthat,asintheknowl-
embarked on a variety of learning studies with H. M.,
edge of facts and events. Some years later Jerome
includingstylus maze tasks,both visual (Milner, 1965)
Bruner, one of the founders of cognitive psychology,
andtactual(Corkin,1965).Withonenotableexception, called“knowinghow”amemorywithoutrecord.Mem-
thesestudiesmerelyservedtodemonstrateH.M.’sex- ory without record, Bruner argued, occursin the case
tremedifficulties with new learning,as evidentalso in ofexperiencesthat“changethenatureoftheorganism,
hisdailylife.Theexceptionwasinthedomainofmotor changehisskills,orchangetherulesbywhichheoper-
skills, where, in 1962,Milner showed that H. M. could ates,butarevirtuallyinaccessibleinmemoryasspecific
learnamirror-drawingtaskefficientlywithstablereten- encounters.” Here,the neuralmachinerythatsupports
tionfromdaytoday(Figure2A). a behavior is presumably modified directly. He called
If one is shown a picture of a double-margin star “knowing that” a memorywith record, a repository of
(Figure 2) and asked to draw a line between the two informationaboutthefactsandeventsofeverydaylife.
margins,onecandothatveryeasily.However,ifonehas The demonstration of intact motor skill learning in
todoitwhileseeingone’shandandthestarreflectedin patientH.M.markedthebeginningofaperiodofexperi-
a mirror, then it becomes quite difficult. When one mental workthat eventually established the biological

Neuron
450
realityofmultiplememorysystems.Thislaterworkmade storingrepresentationsaboutfactsandepisodes.Non-
itclearthatthesparedmemorycapacitiesofH.M.and declarativememoryisneithertruenorfalse.Itunderlies
other amnesic patients with bilateral medial temporal- changes in skilled behavior and the ability to respond
lobe lesionsarenotlimitedtomotorskills.Motorskills appropriatelytostimulithroughpractice,astheresultof
areasubsetofalargecollectionoflearningandmemory conditioningorhabitlearning.Italsoincludeschangesin
abilities,allofwhicharesparedinamnesiaandindepen- the abilityto detector identify objects asthe resultof
dent of the medial temporal lobe. In 1968, Warrington recent encounters, a phenomenon known as priming.
and Weiskrantz demonstrated what turned out to be In the case of nondeclarative memory, performance
another kindofpreservedlearningabilityinagroupof changesastheresultofexperience,whichjustifiesthe
six amnesicpatients, oneafterarighttemporal lobec- termmemory,butperformancechangeswithoutprovid-
tomyandfivewithalcoholicKorsakoff’spsychosis.Us- ing conscious accessto any prior episodes(Squire et
ing a version of the Gollin Figures task (Gollin, 1960), al., 1993; Schacter and Tulving, 1994). Many forms of
Warrington and Weiskrantz asked their patients to try nondeclarativememory,suchashabituation,sensitiza-
toidentifylinedrawingsofcommonobjectsandanimals tion,andclassicalconditioning,arephylogeneticallyan-
(suchasachairoranelephant)fromwhichmostofthe cient and well developed in invertebrate animals that
contour lines had been removed. This is initially quite donothaveamedialtemporallobe orhippocampus.
difficult with the most fragmented drawings, but over A number of nondeclarative forms of memory have
successivepresentationsthecontourisgraduallyfilled beensubjectedtointensivestudy.Inhumans,perhaps
in untilthe subjectcan name the item depicted. On a thebeststudiedexampleofnondeclarativememory is
second presentation of the task, 1 hour later, normal priming, first explored by Warrington and Weiskrantz
subjects show considerable savings, requiring fewer (1968)andbyMilneretal.(1968).EndelTulving,Daniel
contour cues to name the items. On this incomplete Schacter,LarrySquire,andothershaveexploredseveral
figures task and on an analogous fragmented words paradigmsinwhichsubjectsseelistsofwords,pictures
task,WarringtonandWeiskrantzfoundmarkedsavings ofobjects,ornonverbalmaterialsuchasnovelobjects
in theiramnesic patients,with goodretention4weeks or designs (Weiskrantz, 1990; Tulving and Schacter,
later,althoughthepatientsdidnotrememberdoingthe 1990).Subsequently,subjectsaretestedwithbothold
tasks before.Itis truethatthe amnesicgroupshowed andnewitemsandaskedtonamewordsorobjectsas
less savings thanthe age-matchedcontrol group, but quickly as possible, to complete fragments to form
this was only to be expected, given that the control whole items, or to make rapid decisions about items.
subjectscouldrecallmostoftheitemsandanticipated For example, when the first few letters (MOT__) of a
seeingthemagain. recentlystudiedword(MOTEL) arepresented, priming
Milner subsequently replicated the findings for the isevidencedinthetendencytocompletethewordfrag-
GollinfigureswithH.M.Interestingly,H.M.’sinitialper- menttoformthe studywordinsteadofother possible
formanceonthefirstexposuretothematerialwasabove words. Severely amnesic patients exhibit fully intact
the control mean, illustrating his superior perceptual priming, despite being unable to recognize as familiar
abilities.Onretesting,1hourlater,hereducedhiserror theitemsthathadbeen presentedpreviously.
scoreby48%,althoughhedidnotrememberseeingany Otherformsofnondeclarativememoryalsohavebeen
of thedrawings before.Moreover,heshowedresidual studied. These include habit memory, which refers to
savings 4 months later (Milner etal., 1968). This long- gradually acquired dispositions or tendencies that are
term effect of a prior visual experience, which Milner specifictoasetofstimuliandthatguidebehavior.Habit
called “perceptuallearning,” is an instance of what is learningsurviveshippocampal damagein humansand
nowknownaspriming,aformoflearningdistinctfrom experimental animals but is impaired by damage to
motorskillandwhich,inthiscase,isprobablymediated thecaudatenucleus (Packardetal.,1989;Knowlton et
byhighervisual corticalareas. al.,1996).Emotionallearning,asinthedevelopmentof
phobias or in fear conditioning, is dependent on the
amygdala.Anenormousamounthasbeenlearnedabout
TheDeclarativeandNondeclarative the essential structures and connections involved in
MemorySystems emotional learning, particularly from studies in which
In1980,NealCohenandLarrySquireshowedthatamne- ratslearntofearaneutralstimulussuchasatone(fear
sic patients could learn the task of reading mirror- conditioningandfear-potentiatedstartle)(LeDoux,1995;
reversedprintaswellasnormalsubjects.Thesefindings Davisetal.,1997).Theamygdalahasalsobeenshownto
broadened furtherthescope ofwhatamnesicpatients beimportantforemotionallearninginhumans(Damasio,
could do and suggested a fundamental distinction in 1995; Cahill et al., 1996). Moreover, the amygdala is
the way all of usprocess and store information about essential not only for emotional learning itself; it also
theworld.Themajordistinctionisbetweendeclarative exerts modulatory effects on other memory systems
memory and a collection of nondeclarative, noncon- (McGaugh et al., 1996). For example,the amygdala is
scious formsofmemory. responsible for the enhancement of declarative, con-
Declarative memory (Figure 3) is what is ordinarily scious memory,whichnormallyoccurswith emotional
meantbythetermmemory.Itdependsontheintegrity arousal(Adolphsetal., 1997).
ofthemedialtemporallobeandaffordsthecapacityfor Perhapsthe beststudiedexampleofnondeclarative
consciousrecollectionsaboutfactsandevents.Declar- memoryinmammalsisclassicalPavlovianconditioning
ative memoryis propositional—itcan beeither trueor ofdiscrete behavioralresponses.Abody ofworkiniti-
false.Itis involvedinmodellingthe externalworldand ated in the early 1980s byRichard Thompsonand his

Review:Milner,Squire,andKandel
451
Figure3. ATaxonomyofMammalianMem-
orySystems
Thistaxonomyliststhebrainstructuresand
connectionsthoughttobeespeciallyimpor-
tantforeachkindofdeclarativeandnonde-
clarativememory.
colleagueshasfocused onbasicdelay conditioningof David Amaral has recentlyreviewed the results of a
the rabbit eyeblink response (conditioned stimulus (cid:53) magnetic resonanceimagingstudy ofH. M. (Corkinet
tone;unconditionedstimulus(cid:53)airpuff;conditionedre- al., 1997).He finds that Scoville’s removalwas in fact
sponse(cid:53)eyeblink).Basedonanatomicalfindings,elec- exactlyashehaddescribedit,exceptthattheresection
tricalstimulation,andreversiblelesiontechniques, the only extends about 5 cm posteriorly in both hemi-
resultsprovidestrongevidencethattheessentialmem- spheres,insteadoftheradical8cmoriginallyreported.
ory trace circuit includes the cerebellum and related Thus, in both hemispheres the removal included the
brainstemcircuitry andthat thememorytraces them- amygdala,theperirhinalandentorhinalcortex,andthe
selvesareformedandstoredinthecerebellum(Thomp- anterior hippocampus. The parahippocampal cortex
son and Krupa, 1994). To date, eyeblink conditioning waslargelyspared.Mostimportantly,thetemporalneo-
providestheclearestinformationaboutthelocalization cortexandthetemporalstemwerespared.Iftheroles
ofamemorywithinthemammalianbrain. of these various structures were tobe understood, an
In humans, several kinds of nondeclarative memory animalmodelclearlywasneeded.
havebeenstudied,whicharelikelybasedonperceptual
learning. These include adaptation-level effects, the NonhumanPrimateModelsof DeclarativeMemory
abilitytoresolverandom-dotstereograms,theabilityto AssoonasH.M.wasdescribedin1957,effortsbegan
learntheregularitiesof“artificialgrammars”bystudying toestablishananimalmodelofhiscondition intherat
lawfullyorderedletterstrings,andtheabilitytoacquire and monkey. If the concept of conscious recollection
knowledgeaboutcategories. Incategorylearning,one is central to declarative memory, how can declarative
extractsandstoresinformationabouttheprototype(or memory be studied in experimental animals? Several
characteristicshavebeenusefulinextendingthenotion
representativeinstance)ofaseriesofitemsbystudying
of declarative memory to mice, rats, and monkeys
manydifferentitemsthat,whenaveragedtogether,de-
(Eichenbaum,1997).Theseincludeitsflexibilityandthe
scribe the prototype. All these forms of memory are
ability to use it inferentially in novel situations. It took
intact in amnesic patients (Squire et al., 1993; Squire
considerabletimetoachievesuchamodel,andthefirst
andZola-Morgan,1996).Thesekinds ofmemorylikely
results of lesionstudies in the monkey were puzzling.
involvechangeswithinthesamecorticalareasresponsi-
Animalswith bilateralmedial temporal-lobe resections
ble forperceiving andanalyzing the materialsthat are
similartowhat wasdescribedinH. M.showednormal
studied.
performance on visual discrimination learning tasks,
even when concurrent trials on a different task were
WhatPartsof theMedialTemporal Lobe
interpolatedaspotential“distractors”forthediscrimina-
AreImportantforMemory? tion learning. This led many investigators to question
Thebehavioralstudiesreviewedaboveprovidecompel- eitherthehumanfindingsorthevalidityofcross-species
ling evidencethatthe humandeclarative memorysys- comparisons. Itwas notuntiltheearly 1980s,withthe
tem is critically dependent upon the medial temporal conceptofmultiplememorysystemsandtheideathat
region.Yetwestillhavemuchtolearnabouttherelative amnesia impairedonlyonekindofmemory, thatit be-
importance of specific structures within the region for came clearerwhichmemorytaskswereappropriate to
memoryprocessesandthemodeofinteractionofthese givetoexperimentalanimals.Thebeginningofthesolu-
structureswithotherbrainareas.AlthoughScovilleand tioncamein1978whenMortMishkindescribedsevere
Milner(1957)drewattentiontothehippocampusinthe deficitsinmonkeyswithbilateralmedialtemporal-lobe
titletotheirpaper,thiswasonlybecauseintheirexperi- lesions, whenthe monkeyswere givena one-trialtask
encebilateralremovalslimitedtotheamygdalaandun- ofobjectrecognitionmemory(delayednonmatchingto
cusdidnotresultinamnesia;theyneverclaimedthatthe sample). This finding was consistent with the severe
hippocampallesionsalonewereresponsibleforH.M.’s impairment shown by H. M. on single-trial delayed
severememoryloss. matching tasks.

Neuron
452
Figure4. TheMedialTemporal-LobeMemorySystemintheMonkey
(A)Ventralviewofamonkeybrainillustratingthecorticalareasunderlyingthehippocampusthatarepartofthemedialtemporal-lobesystem.
Blue,perirhinalcortex;pink,entorhinalcortex;green,parahippocampalcortex.Theperiamygdaloidcortex(yellow)isnotthoughttobeapart
ofthesystem.
(B)Schematicviewofthememorysystem.Theentorhinalcortexisamajorsourceofprojectionstothehippocampalregion,whichincludes
thedentategyrus(DG),thecellfieldsofthehippocampus,andthesubicularcomplex(S).Nearlytwo-thirdsofthecorticalinputtoentorhinal
cortexoriginatesintheadjacentperirhinalandparahippocampalcortices,whichinturnreceiveprojectionsfromunimodalandpolymodal
areasinthefrontal,temporal,andparietal lobes.Theentorhinalcortexalsoreceivesotherdirectinputsfromorbitalfrontalcortex,insular
cortex,andsuperiortemporalgyrus.Alltheseprojectsarereciprocal.
The1978paperdidnotsettlemattersallatoncebut H.M.,aswellasthetwopatientsdescribedbyPenfield
by the early 1980s, after additional work by Mishkin, andMilner(1958),appearedtohaveintactmemoryfor
Zola-Morgan, and others, an animal model of human remoteeventsthatoccurredyearsbeforetheirsurgery.
amnesia in the monkey was established. With this Subsequently,formalteststhataskedaboutpastpublic
model,thequestionofpreciselywhichstructureswithin eventsalsoshowedamnesicpatientstohaveimpaired
themedialtemporallobewereimportantcouldbesys- memoryforeventsleadinguptotheamnesiabutintact
tematicallyexplored.Theidentificationoftheanatomi- memory for more remote events (Squire et al., 1989;
cal components of the medial temporal-lobe memory Rempel-Clower et al., 1996). This loss of premorbid
system required about 10 years of experimental work memory(retrogradeamnesia)cancovermonthsoreven
(Squire and Zola-Morgan, 1991). The important struc- years,dependingontheextentofmedialtemporal-lobe
tures are the hippocampus proper, the dentate gyrus, damage(Rempel-Cloweretal.,1996).
Studies of remote memory and retrograde amnesia
thesubicularcomplex,andtheentorhinalcortex(which
in amnesic patients necessarily rely on retrospective
togethercomprisethehippocampalformation)andthe
methods andimperfect tests. Asa result,it is difficult
adjacent,anatomicallyrelatedcortex:theperirhinaland
tocompareperformanceacrosspasttimeperiods.For
parahippocampal cortices (Figure 4). The amygdala
thesereasons,thephenomenonofretrogradeamnesia
provednottobeacomponentofthedeclarativememory
hasbeguntobeexaminedprospectivelyinexperimental
system, although it can exert a modulatory action on
animals.Todate,eightdifferentstudieshavebeencar-
declarative memory.
ried out in which equivalent amounts of training were
A lesion restricted to any of the major components
given attwo or moretimes beforebilateral damageto
of this system has a significant effect on declarative
thehippocampalformation,andretentionwasassessed
memory. Indeed, two amnesicpatients have been de-
shortly after surgery (Figure 5). Theworkhas involved
scribed (R. B. and G. D.) who, following an ischemic
mice,rats,rabbits,andmonkeysandavarietyofmem-
event,hadbilaterallesionslimitedtotheCA1regionof
orytasksincludingobjectdiscriminationlearning,con-
the hippocampus (Zola-Morgan et al., 1986; Rempel- text-specificfearconditioning,mazelearning,andtrace
Cloweretal.,1996).Theirdeficitwasqualitativelysimilar conditioningoftheeyeblinkreflex.Insevenoftheeight
toH.M.’simpairment,thoughquantitativelyitwasmuch studies, clear evidence was obtained for temporally
milder.ItisnowclearthattheseverityofH.M.’smemory graded retrograde amnesia, which covered a period
impairmentdependsnotonlyonhishippocampaldam- ranging froma few daystoabouta monthbefore sur-
agebutonthefactthathissurgeryincludedthehippo- gery.Intheeighthstudy(Bolhius etal., 1994),memory
campalregiontogetherwiththeperirhinalandentorhinal wasaffectedsimilarlyatthetimepointstested,although
cortices (Corkinetal., 1997). performance was always at chance levels so that no
Akeyfeatureofmedialtemporal-lobefunctionisthat differencebetweenthetwotimepointscouldhavebeen
the medial temporal lobe is involved in memory for a detected.
limitedperiodoftimeafterlearning.Theinitialevidence Recentaccountsoftemporallygradedretrogradeam-
for this idea came from the observation that patient nesia propose that medial temporal-lobe structures

Review:Milner,Squire,andKandel
453
Figure5. SummaryofFindingsfromEightStudiesthatHaveExaminedRetrogradeAmnesiaProspectively
Inthesestudies,anequivalentamountoftrainingwasgivenateachoftwoormoretimesbeforehippocampalformationdamage,andretention
wasassessedshortlyaftersurgery.Ineachcase,thedatashowtheperformanceofcontrol(CON)andoperatedanimals(H(cid:53)hippocampus,
EC(cid:53)entorhinalcortex,FX(cid:53)fornix)asafunctionoftheintervalbetweentrainingandsurgery.Controlanimalstypicallyexhibitedforgetting
astheintervalbetweentrainingandsurgeryincreased.Insevenoftheeightstudies,operatedanimalsexhibitedtemporallygradedretrograde
amnesia.Theywereimpairedatretainingmaterialtheyhadlearnedrecently,buttheyretainedremotelylearnedmaterialaswellascontrol
animals.Inaddition,theoperatedanimalstypicallyretainedremotelylearnedmaterialbetterthanrecentlylearnedmaterial.Inthelowerleft
panel,thedottedlinedenoteschanceperformance.Fromleftto right,beginningonthetoprow,thestudiesarebyWinocur(1990);Zola-
MorganandSquire(1990);KimandFanselow(1992);Cho,Beracochea,andJaffard(1993);Bolhuis,Stewart,andJaffard(1993);Kim,Clark,
andThompson(1995);ChoandKesner(1996);andWiig,Cooper,andBear(1996).
directagradualprocessofreorganizationandstabiliza- placesandobjects,andthistypeofmemoryhasmany
tion by changing the organization of cortical repre- ofthecharacteristicsofhumandeclarativememory,af-
sentations, forexample,by graduallybinding together fording,forinstance,theflexibleuseofrelationalinfor-
the multiple, geographically separate cortical regions mation about multiple distal cues. As we shall see in
thattogether store memory forawhole event (Alvarez the sectionsthatfollow,the possibilityofstudyingde-
and Squire, 1994; McClelland et al., 1995). After suffi- clarativememoryinmicehasopenedthisformofmem-
cient time has passed, the hippocampal formation is ory toamoleculargeneticapproach.
notneededtosupportstorageorretrievalofdeclarative
memory,and long-termmemory is fully dependenton TheMolecularBiologicalApproach
theneocortex(reviewedbySquireandAlvarez,1995). toMemoryStorage
Thedifferentcomponentsofthemedialtemporallobe How are we to think about the cellular and molecular
need nothaveequivalent rolesin declarative memory; mechanismsofmemorystorage?Bytheendofthenine-
differentstructureswithinthemedialtemporallobeare teenthcentury,biologists hadcometoappreciatethat
likely to carry out different subfunctions. As damage mature nerve cells have lost their capacity to divide.
increases,fewerstrategiesmaybeavailableforstoring ThisfactpromptedSantiagoRamo´nyCajaltopropose
memory, with the result that memory impairment be- thatlearningdoesnotresultinthe proliferationofnew
comesmoresevere.Tostudythefunctionsoftheindi- nerve cells but instead causes existing nerve cells to
vidualregions in humanswouldrequire many patients grow more branches and to strengthen their connec-
with very specific brain lesions. Fortunately, recent tionswithothernervecellssoastobeabletocommuni-
anatomical and behavioral studies indicate that, even cate withthemmoreeffectively (RamonyCajal,1894).
though there are differences in detail, the anatomical This prescientidearaisedthreesetsofquestions.
andfunctionalorganizationofthemedialtemporal-lobe First,doesmemoryinvolvepersistentchangesinsyn-
systemis similar in humans, nonhuman primates, and aptic strength?Ifso,whatarethemolecular underpin-
simplermammals suchasratsandmice(Squire,1992; ningsofthese synapticchanges?
Mayfordetal.,1996).Moreover,eventhemouserequires Second, how do short-term synaptic changes differ
this memory systemfor the storageof memory about from the changes thatsupport long-term storage? Do

Neuron
454
theyoccuratdifferentloci,orcanthesameneuronstore orevenmanythousandsofnervecellsforperfectlygood
information forboth short-andlong-termmemory? long-termstorageofavarietyofdifferentmemories.
Third,ifmemorystorageresultsfromchangesinspe- Theseearlybehavioralstudiesininvertebratesledto
cificsynapticconnections,dodeclarativememoryand the delineation of a family of psychological concepts
thevariousnondeclarativeformsofmemoryusediffer- that paralleled those first described in vertebrates by
entmolecularmechanismsforstorage,orarethestor- boththeclassicalbehaviorists—PavlovandThorndike—
age mechanisms usedby these two memory systems andtheir moderncounterparts—Kamin,Rescorla, and
fundamentallysimilar? Wagner. These concepts included the distinction be-
Toexploretheseideas,neurobiologistsdevelopeda tweenvariousformsofassociativeandnonassociative
number of model systems for the specific purpose of learning, the role of contingency asopposed to mere
optimizing the ability to study synaptic change in the contiguity, short-term memory consolidation, storage,
contextofbehavioralmemorystorage,withtheultimate retrieval of long-term memory, and forgetting. Subse-
goal of identifying the cellular and molecular basis of quentcellularstudiesofthesesimpleformsoflearning
the synapticchangesresponsibleforthestorage(see, illustrated that these concepts, initially inferred from
for example, Kandel and Tauc, 1964; Thompson and purely behavioral studies, could now be approached
Spencer,1966;KandelandSpencer,1968).Thereduc- directlyintermsoftheirunderlyingcellularandmolecu-
tionistapproachtonondeclarativememorystoragebe- lar mechanisms (reviewed by Kandel, 1976; Hawkins
gan withthe cell biological studiesof the marinesnail andKandel,1984; CarewandSahley,1986).Thus, the
AplysiabyKandel(KandelandTauc,1964)andwiththe abilitytoanalyzelearning-relatedsynapticmechanisms
geneticstudiesofDrosophilabyBenzer(Benzer,1967). brought to light not only a new set ofmechanistic in-
sights intothe plasticproperties ofindividualsynaptic
connections,butinsodoingthesestudiesbroughtcon-
Cell BiologicalandMolecularInsightsinto
creteness and clarity to the psychological concepts
Nondeclarative MemoryStorage
themselves.Forexample,byidentifyingsignificantcom-
ThecellbiologicalstudiesinAplysia(KandelandTauc,
ponentsoftheneuralcircuitsunderlyingsimplebehav-
1964;KupfermannandKandel,1969;Castelluccietal.,
iorssuchasthegill-withdrawalreflexinAplysia,thetail
1970)weresoonjoinedbystudiesofotherinvertebrates
flick in the crayfish, feeding in Limax or Aplysia, and
including other opisthobranch snails, specifically Her-
phototaxisinHermissenda,studiesininvertebratesde-
missenda(Alkon,1974)andPleurobranchaea(Davisand
lineatedhowelementsin the behavioralcircuitsthem-
Gillette, 1978), the land snail Limax (Gelperin, 1975),
selveschangedwhenbehaviorwasmodifiedbyvarious
crayfish (Krasne, 1969), and honey bees (Menzel and
formsoflearning(reviewedbyCarewandSahley,1986).
Erber, 1978).The idea underlying these cell biological
These findings illustrate that nondeclarative memory
studieswasthatthesimplebrainsofcertainexperimen-
storagedoesnotdepend onspecialized memoryneu-
tally tractableinvertebrates combined the advantages
rons or systems of neurons whose only function is to
ofhavingarelativelysmallnumberofnervecellsinthe
store rather than process information. Rather, simple
brain with cells that (with the exception of the honey
nondeclarative memory storage results from changes
bee) areunusually largeandreadilyidentifiable.These
inneuronsthatarethemselvescomponentsofthereflex
featuresmadetheirbehaviorandtheirabilitytomodify
pathway.Thestorageofnondeclarativememoryisem-
behaviorbylearningaccessibletocellularandmolecular
beddedintheneuralcircuitthatproducesthebehavior.
analysis.Analogousreductionistapproacheswerealso Thesestudies thereforeprovidedthe first clearinsight
appliedtothemammalianbrain,inparticulartotheiso- thattheorganizationandimplementationofnondeclara-
lated spinal cord(Spencer etal., 1966),to brain slices tivememoryisdifferentfromdeclarativememorywhere
ofthehippocampus(SchwartzkroinandWebster,1975), awholeneuralsystem,themedialtemporal-lobemem-
and to learnedbehavior dependenton the cerebellum ory system, is needed to ensure the remembrance of
(McCormick and Thompson, 1984) and the amygdala thingspast.
(Davis, 1995;LeDoux, 1995). Moreover,thesecellbiologicalstudiesillustratedsev-
Thefirst insight to emerge fromthissimplesystems eral general principlesabout memory-relatedsynaptic
approachtonondeclarativememorywaspurelybehav- plasticity. Tobegin with,the studies providedthe first
ioral.Studiesofinvertebratesrevealedthatevenanimals directevidencefortwoofCajal’sprescientsuggestions:
with limited numbers of nerve cells—approximately thatthesynapticconnectionsbetweenneuronsmediat-
20,000 to 100,000 central neurons in the nervoussys- ingbehaviorarenotfixedbutcanbecomemodifiedby
tems of Aplysia, Hermissenda, Pleurobranchaea, and learning,and thatthese modifications persist and can
Limax and approximately 300,000 in Drosophila—had serve as elementary components of memory storage
rather remarkable behavioral and learning capabilities (Figure 6; Castellucciet al., 1970, 1978; Zucker, 1971;
(reviewedbyCarewandSahley,1986).Infact,eventhe CastellucciandKandel,1974).Inaddition,thesestudies
gill withdrawal reflex, perhaps the simplest behavioral showedthatthesamesetofsynapticconnectionswas
reflexofAplysia,couldbemodifiedbyseveraldifferent foundtobeabletoparticipateinseveraldifferentlearn-
forms of learning—habituation, dishabituation, sensiti- ingprocesses andtobe modifiedbythemin opposite
zation,classicalconditioning,andoperantconditioning directions.Forexample,thesynapticstrengthofasingle
(reviewedbyCarewandSahley,1986).Moreover,each synapticconnectioncouldbeincreasedwithsensitiza-
oftheseformsoflearningcouldgiverisetobothshort- tion and classical conditioning, and it could be de-
and long-term forms of nondeclarative memory as a creasedwithhabituation(Castelluccietal.,1978;Carew
functionoftheamountofrepeatedtraining.Thesestud- et al., 1979; Hawkins et al., 1983; Frost et al., 1985;
iessuggestedthatananimaldoesnotneedalargebrain MurphyandGlanzman,1997;Baoetal.,1997,1998).

Review:Milner,Squire,andKandel
455
Furthermore,inthegill-withdrawalandtail-withdrawal
reflexofAplysia(Hawkinsetal.,1981a,1981b;Frostet
al., 1988; Cleary etal., 1995), andin the escape reflex
of Tritonia(Katz and Frost,1995),there were changes
in synaptic strength with habituation andsensitization
not only inthe connections between thesensory neu-
rons andtheir motoneuron targetcells, but alsointhe
connectionsmadebyinterneuronsontothetargetcells.
Thus,withintheneuralpathwayscontrollingthereflex,
thestorageofevenasimplenondeclarativememoryis
distributedandinvolvesmultiplestorage.
Finally, just as behavioral studies of memory in the
gill-withdrawal reflex had found that memory storage
has stages—a short-term form lasting minutes and a
long-termformlastingdaystoweeks—sodidthecellu-
lar studies findthatthe synapticchanges contributing
tomemorystoragealsohavestages(Castelluccietal.,
1978;Carewetal.,1979;Frostetal.,1988).Thus,both
the acquisition of learning and its retention as short-
andlong-termmemorywerefoundtohavearepresenta-
tionatthelevel ofindividualsynapticconnections.
The initial analyses in the 1970s focused on short-
term changes. Theseshowed thatone mechanism for
the synaptic plasticity induced in both the gill-with-
drawal reflex of Aplysia and in the tail flick response
of crayfish was through the modulation of transmitter
release. A depression of transmitter release occurred
with short-term habituation and an enhancement with
short-termsensitization(Zuckeretal.,1971;Castellucci
etal.,1970,1974,1976).
Avarietyofcellbiologicalstudiesonthemonosynap-
ticconnectionsbetweenthesensoryneuronsandmo-
tor neurons of the gill- and tail-withdrawal reflexes in
Aplysia outlined one class of molecular mechanisms
for the short-term enhancement of transmitter release
producedbysensitization(Figure7;Brunellietal.,1976;
Kandel and Schwartz, 1982; Byrne and Kandel,1995).
Asinglesensitizingstimulustothetailledtotheactiva-
tion of threeclasses of modulatory neurons, the most
importantofwhichusesserotonin(5-HT)asitstransmit-
ter. SerotoninactsonaGprotein–coupled receptorto
activateadenylylcyclaseandincreasethelevelofcAMP
inthesensoryneurons.TheincreaseincAMPactivates
thecAMP-dependentproteinkinases(PKA),whichthen
enhancetransmitterreleaseintwoways:(1)byclosure
of K(cid:49) channels leading to a broadening of the action
potential, therebyenhancingCa2(cid:49) influx necessary for
vesicle exocytosis; and (2) by acting directly in ways
that are not yet understood, on one or more steps in
vesiclemobilizationandexocytoticrelease(Castellucci
et al., 1980, 1982; Byrne and Kandel, 1995). A similar
second messengersignaling pathway forlearning and
Figure6. Long-TermHabituationoftheWithdrawalReflexinAplysia
IsRepresentedontheCellularLevelbyaDramaticDepressionof
SynapticEffectivenessbetweentheSensoryandMotorNeurons
(A)Timecourseofbehavioralhabituation.T1toT4representsthe (B[B])Themeanpercentageofphysiologicallydetectableconnec-
averageof10trialsadayfor4daysoftraining.R1,R7,andR21 tionsinhabituatedanimalsatseveralpointsintimeafterlong-term
areretentiontests1day,1week,and3weeksaftertraining.(From habituationtraining.(FromCastelluccietal.,1978.)
Carewetal.,1972.) (C) Long-term habituation and sensitization involve structural
(B[A])Comparisonofthesynapticpotentialsina sensoryneuron changesinthepresynapticterminalsofsensoryneurons.(Adapted
andamotorneuroninacontrol(untrained)animalandinananimal fromBaileyandChen,1983.)Thishistogramcomparesthenumber
thathasbeensubjectedtolong-termhabituation.Inthehabituated ofpresynapticterminalsincontrolanimalswiththoseinlong-term
animal,thesynapticpotentialinthemotorneuronisstillundetect- habituated and sensitized animals. The numberis highestin the
able1weekaftertraining.(FromCastelluccietal.,1978.) sensitizedanimals.

Neuron
456
Figure7. Schematic Outline of Changes in
theSensoryNeuronsoftheGill-Withdrawal
Reflex that Accompany Short- and Long-
TermMemoryforSensitizationinAplysia
Sensitizationisproducedbyapplyinganox-
ious stimulus to another part of the body,
such as thetail. Stimuli to thetail activate
sensory neurons that excite facilitating in-
terneurons,whichformsynapsesontheter-
minalsofthesensoryneuronsinnervatingthe
siphonskin.Attheseaxo–axonicsynapses,
theinterneuronsareabletoenhance trans-
mitter release from the sensory neurons
(presynapticfacilitation).Serotonin(5-HT),a
transmitter releasedby facilitatoryneurons,
actsonasensoryneurontoinitiateboththe
short-termandthelong-termfacilitationthat
contributetothememoryprocesses.
Short-term facilitation (lasting minutes) in-
volves covalent modification of preexisting
proteins(pathways1and2).Serotoninacts
ona transmembranereceptorto activate a
GTP-bindingproteinthatstimulatestheen-
zymeadenylylcyclasetoconvertATPtothe
secondmessengercAMP.Inturn,cAMPacti-
vatesproteinkinaseA,whichphosphorylates
andcovalentlymodifies anumberof target
proteins.TheseincludeclosingofK(cid:49)chan-
nels,whichprolongstheactionpotentialand
increasestheinfluxofCa2(cid:49),thusaugmenting
transmitter release (pathway 1) as well as
stepsinvolvedintransmitteravailabilityand
release(pathway2).Caninvolvethejointac-
tionofPKAandproteinkinaseC(PKC).The
duration of these modifications represents
theretentionorstorage ofa componentof
theshort-termmemory.
Long-term facilitation (lasting one or more
days)involvesthesynthesisofnewproteins.
The switch for thisinductive mechanismis
initiatedbytheproteinkinaseA.Thiskinase
translocates to thenucleus (long-termpathway) whereit phosphorylatesthe cyclicAMP responseelement–binding (CREB)protein. The
transcriptionalactivatorsbindtocyclicAMPregulatoryelements(CRE)locatedintheupstreamregionoftwotypesofcAMP-induciblegenes.
ToactivateCREB-1,proteinkinaseAneedsalsotoremove therepressiveactionofCREB-2,whichiscapableofinhibitingtheactivation
capabilityofCREB-1.ProteinkinaseAisthoughttomediatethederepressionofCREB-2bymeansofanotherproteinkinase,MAPkinase.
Onegene(closedsquare)activatedbyCREBencodesaubiquitinhydrolase,acomponentofaspecificubiquitinproteasethatleadstothe
regulatedproteolysisoftheregulatorysubunitofPKA.Thiscleaveofthe(inhibitory)regulatorysubunitresultsinpersistentactivityofprotein
kinaseA,leadingtopersistentphosphorylationofthesubstrateproteinsofPKA,includingbothCREB-1andtheproteininvolvedintheshort-
termprocess.Thesecondsetofproteins(closedtriangles)isimportantforthegrowthofnewsynapticconnections.(FromKandel,Schwartz,
andJessell.)
short-term memory was identifiedin Drosophila using StudiesinAplysiaduringthelastdecadehavefound
geneticapproaches(Byersetal.,1981;Aceves-Pinaet thatthesamesetofconnectionsthatundergotheshort-
al., 1983;Davis,1996). termchangesalsoundergolong-termchanges,andthe
Behavioral studies in vertebrates had shown earlier long-termchangesinsynapticplasticityparallelbehav-
thatlong-termmemorydifferedfromshort-termmemory ioral memory in also requiring new protein synthesis
not only in time course but also mechanistically (re- (Goelet et al., 1986; Montarolo et al., 1986). Thus, a
viewedbyDavisandSquire,1984).Long-termmemory singlesynapticconnectioncannotonlybemodifiedin
requiressynthesisofnewproteins,whereasshort-term oppositewaysbydifferentformsoflearning,butitcan
memory does not. These behavioral studies raised a bemodifiedforperiodsrangingfromminutestoweeks
numberofquestionsthatcouldnowbeexploredonthe bythe differentstagesofamemoryprocess.Whereas
cellularlevel.Canthesamesetofsynapticconnections onetraining trial to the tail in the intact animal or one
mediatebothshort-termandlong-termsynapticplastic- pulseof5-HTtothesensoryneuronsinitiatestheshort-
ity? CanPKAinducethelong-termaswellasthetran- term process through covalent modification of pre-
sientchanges,ordoesthelong-termprocessrecruita existing proteins, five repeated training trials or five
new signaling system? Finally, is this requirement for pulsesof5-HTinitiatetheproteinsynthesis–dependent
proteinsynthesisevidentatthelevel ofsinglecellsin- long-term process.With repeated training, the cAMP-
volvedinmemorystorage?Ifso,howisproteinsynthe- dependentproteinkinaserecruitsanotherkinase,ami-
sis activatedforlong-termmemory? togen-activatedproteinkinase(MAPkinase), andboth

Review:Milner,Squire,andKandel
457
of these kinases translocate into the cell’s nucleus SimpleSystems forGeneticStudies of
wheretheyactivatethetranscriptionalactivatorCREB-1 Nondeclarative MemoryStorage
(thecAMPresponseelement–bindingprotein)(seeBac- Thesecell andmolecular biologicalstudiesofmemory
skaietal.,1993;Kaangetal.,1993;Martinetal.,1997). in invertebrates weredesignedto address two issues:
InAplysiaandDrosophila,bothPKAandCREB-1are (1)tolocalizesomeofthesitesofneuronalchangewithin
notonlynecessary butare alsosufficientforthelong- aneuralcircuitthatismodifiedbylearningandmemory
termenhancementofsynapticstrength(Schacheretal., storage; and(2)to specifythe moleculesimportantfor
1988;Yinetal.,1994,1995;Davisetal.,1996;reviewed these changes. This cell and molecular biological ap-
byMartinandKandel,1996).InAplysia,CREB-1 leads proach has beenparalleledand complementedbyge-
totheactivationofacascadeofimmediate-earlygenes. neticstudiesdesignedtoidentifyspecificgenesimpor-
Oneofthese,thegeneforubiquitinhydrolase,isthefirst tantforlearningandmemory.
neuron-specific step in thissignaling cascade (Hedge Thecriticalfirststepforstudyingthegeneticsofbe-
etal., 1997).This enzyme is arate-limiting step in the havior, learning, and memory was taken by Seymour
activation of the ubiquitin proteosome (Figure 7). The Benzer. In 1967, Benzer began to apply genetic tech-
proteosome in turn cleaves the regulatory subunit of niquestoDrosophilabehaviorbyexaminingtheeffects
PKA.Thisfrees thecatalyticsubunit andestablishesa on behavior of changing one gene at a time. Having
persistently active PKA, which can continue to phos- identifiedanumberofinterestingmutantswithpheno-
phorylatesubstrateproteins necessaryforthemainte- typesincourtship,vision,andcircadianrhythms,Benzer
nance of facilitation but now without requiring either turned to learningandmemory storage. Togetherwith
5-HTorcAMP. his students ChipQuinnand YadinDudai, Benzerfirst
Thisneuron-specificmemorymechanismisactivefor demonstratedthatfliescanacquireassociative classi-
about10hours(Hedgeetal.,1997).Whatgivesthelong- cal conditioning(Dudaietal.,1974;Quinnetal.,1974).
termfacilitationself-maintainedpropertiesistheaction They can remember to avoid an odor that has been
of a second immediate-early gene, the transcriptional pairedwithanelectricshock.Usingthislearningassay,
factor C/EBP. This factor acts on downstream genes, Benzer’s students next screenedthousands offlies to
whichleadstothesynthesisofproteinsandthegrowth findmutantsthatwereimpairedandcouldnotremem-
ofnewsynapticconnections(Alberinietal.,1994;Hedge berthataparticularodorwaspairedwithshock.Inthis
etal.,1997).Thisgrowthofnewsynapticcontacts ap- way, Duncan Byers and Ronald Davis isolated dunce,
pearstobethestable,anatomicallyself-maintainedre- the firstmutant flywithadefectin short-termmemory
flection ofstablelong-term memory(Bailey andChen, storage(Byersetal.,1981).Themutantgenewasfound
1988;Glanzmanetal., 1989;Bailey etal., 1992).Thus, to encode a cAMP-dependent phosphodiesterase, an
enzyme that destroys cAMP—the same pathway that
synapses not only express plasticity by modulating
had been delineated for short-term sensitization in
transmitterfunction;synapsesalsoexpressplasticityin
Aplysia.Asaresultofthemutation,thefliesaccumulate
termsoftheirstructuralmorphologyandbyincreasing
too much cAMP, which interferes with their ability to
ordecreasing thenumberofreleasesites.
acquireandstore newinformation.
The initial studies of the switch from short-term to
Quinn,Dudai,Davis,Tully,Yin,andothersthensearched
long-termmemory focused on positiveregulators that
for other mutants and found that a number of other
favormemorystorage.RecentstudiesinDrosophilaand
genes that interfere with short-term memory also are
Aplysia have revealed the surprising finding that the
involvedinthecyclicAMPpathway(Figure8).(1)amne-
switchtothelong-termsynapticchangeandtothegrowth
siacisdeficientinageneforaneuropeptidethatbinds
ofnew synapticconnections are normallyconstrained
toaGprotein–coupledreceptorthatstimulatesadenylyl
byinhibitoryfactors—memorysuppressorgenes—that
cyclase (Feaney and Quinn, 1995). (2) Gs encodes a
oppose long-term memory storage and determine the
stimulatory (cid:97) subunit of a G protein (Connolly et al.,
ease withwhichshort-termmemory canbe converted
1996).(3) rutabagahasa specificdeficiency inthe en-
to long-term memory (reviewed by Abel et al., 1998).
zymeadenylylcyclase,theenzymethatsynthesizescy-
One important constraint is an inhibitory transcription
clicAMPfromATP(Dudaietal.,1983;Livingstonetal.,
factor,therepressorCREB-2(Bartschetal.,1995).Over-
1984; Levin et al., 1992). (4) dunce, as we saw, is a
expressionoftherepressorselectivelyblockslong-term
mutationinacAMPphosphodiesterase.(5)DCO(Davis,
facilitationinAplysia.Removaloftherepressionallows
1996) is deficient in the catalytic subunit of PKA. In
asingleexposureofserotonin,whichnormallyproduces
addition, Quinn found thatthe transient expression of
short-termfacilitation lastingonly minutes,to produce a gene that shuts down PKA interferes with memory
long-term facilitation lasting days and to induce the storage(Drainetal.,1991;Davis,1996).(6) PKA-RIen-
growthofnewsynapticconnections. codesaregulatorysubunitofPKA(Goodwinetal.,1997).
Theseseveral findingson thecell biology ofnonde- More recently, Tim Tully has found that Drosophila
clarative memory storage in invertebrates carry with also has long-term memory, and that this long-term
themtheimportantimplicationsthatthecellularrepre- memory requires repeatedtraining atspacedintervals
sentationofshort-termmemoryinvolvesco-valentmod- and isdependentupon newproteinsynthesis(Tullyet
ificationsofpre-existingproteinsandthestrengthening al., 1994, 1996).Yin etal. (1994)went on to clone the
of pre-existing connections. By contrast, the cellular Drosophila formofCREB andfoundthatthe gene en-
representation of long-term memory involves CREB- codes twoforms, anactivator anda repressor(Figure
mediated expressionof genes,new proteinsynthesis, 8A).Yin etal.(1994)then overexpressedthe inhibitory
andtheformation ofnewsynapticconnections. formofCREBinfliesunderaheatshockpromoterand

Neuron
458
Figure8. Short-TermandLong-TermMemoryinDrosophila
(A)Memory mutantsinDrosophila.Using reversegenetic methodology,seven genes havebeen isolated thataffect olfactoryassociative
learningandthatareinvolvedindifferentstepsofthecAMPsignaling.Disruptionsofeachofthesegenesproducedeficitsinolfactorylearning
ormemoryformationwithoutaffectingthesensorimotor responsesnecessaryforthelearningtask. (1)amnesiacencodesaneuropeptide
ligandsimilartovertebratePituitaryAdenylylCyclaseActivatingPeptide(FeanyandQuinn,1995).Thisligandactsonaseventransmembrane
spanningGprotein–coupledreceptor.(2)Gsencodesa(stimulatory)alphasubunitofGprotein(Connollyetal.,1996).(3)rutabagaencodes
aTypeIadenylylcyclase(Levinetal.,1992).(4)dunceencodesaTypeIIphosphodiesterase(Chenetal.,1986).(5)DCOencodesacatalytic
subunitofcAMP-dependentproteinkinase(PKA)Skoulakisetal.,1993;Lietal.,1996).(6)PKA-RIencodesaTypeIPKAregulatorysubunit
(Goodwinetal.,1997).Thenuclearend-pointofthispathway,(7)dCREB2encodesbothatranscriptionrepressorandanactivator.
(B) Induction of thedCREB2 activator isoformaccelerates the rateof long-term memoryformation without affecting theamount. CREB
activatortransgenicflies(dCREB2-a)produceaproteinsynthesis-dependentmemory(LTM)afterone trainingsessions,which lastsforat
least7days.SuchminimaltrainingusuallydoesnotinduceLTMinnormalflies(wild-type),withorwithoutheatshock,orinCREBatransgenic
fliesintheabsenceofheatshock((cid:50)hs)whentheyareexposedtoheatshock((cid:49)hs),allowedtorecoverfor3hours,andgivenasingletraining
trial.TheCREBactivatortransgeneisunderthecontroloftheheat-shockpromoter.Normalflies(wild-type),ortransgenicfliesthatarenot
exposedtoheatshock,donotgenerateanysignificantlevelsofmemoryafterasingletrainingtrial.Theamountofmemorythatthetransgenic
flieshaveissimilartolevelsthatwild-typeflieshaveafter10spacedtrainingtrials.(DatafromYinetal.,1995.)
found that this manipulation blocked the formation of honeybee, which also uses PKA for learning (Menzel
long-termmemoryintransgenicflieswithoutdisrupting and Muller, 1996). Based on these studies, Davis has
short-termmemory.Moreover,overexpressingtheacti- suggestedthatthemushroombodiesserveascenters
vating form of Drosophila CREB greatly reduced the for integrating sensory information about odors and
number oftrainingtrialsneededtoestablishlong-term electricshockduring olfactoryconditioning.
memory.Thus, aftertheinduction oftheCREB-activa-
tor,onetrainingsession,whichnormallyproducesonly NondeclarativeMemoryStorageUsesConserved
short-termmemory,givesrisetolong-termmemorylast- SignalTransductionPathway
ingoveraweek(Yinetal.,1995)(Figure8B).Thesedata Bothcellularstudies of Aplysiaand geneticstudies of
suggestthattheratioofCREBactivatortorepressoris DrosophilaindicatethatthecAMPcascadeisoneofthe
criticalfortheactivationofthelong-termprocess. coresignaltransductionpathwaysimportantforcertain
In a number of these memory mutants, the critical elementaryforms ofshort-termandlong-termmemory
geneisexpressedpreferentiallyinthemushroombodies storage.Moreover,thedatainDrosophilaandinAplysia
(Davis, 1996). The mushroom bodies are essential for arecomplementaryinprovidingmolecularevidencethat
olfactorylearningnotonlyinDrosophilabutalsointhe theCREBgenesareimportantcomponentsoftheswitch

Review:Milner,Squire,andKandel
459
fromshort-termtolong-termmemory;andthatinaddi- can readilybe testedabouttheirmemoriesforplaces,
tiontoseveralactivators,therearefunctionalrepressors objects, and odors, and these studies have revealed
thatpreventinformationfrombeingconvertedintolong- thatlesionsofthehippocampusandrelatedstructures
termmemorystorage.Consistentwiththisevolutionary interferewithlong-termstorageofthesekindsofmem-
conservation,featuresofthecAMP–PKA–CREBswitch ory.Onemajorfocusofresearchondeclarativememory
have recently been found in a variety of long-term in rodentshasconcernedtheroleofthehippocampus
adaptivechanges in brainsuch asdrugaddiction and in spatialmemory.
alcohol abuse to convert a short-termchange—social
usage—toalong-termchange—addiction(Nestlerand
Aghajanian,1997). LTP andHippocampal-Dependent
Inabroadersense,these studiesrevealedtheinter- MemoryStorage
esting finding that the evolution of memory storage In the 1970s, two independent findings helped shape
mechanismsinbrainhasbeenachievednotbyrecruit- thinking about the role of the hippocampus in spatial
inganewsetofmoleculesthatisspecializedformemory memory:first,in1971,O’KeefeandDostrovskydiscov-
perse.Rather,memoryhasco-optedandmodified,by eredthathippocampalpyramidalcellscanencodeinfor-
combining it with additional components, a well-used mation about space (O’Keefe and Dostrovsky, 1971).
andefficientsignalingsystemusedforotherpurposes Second, in 1973, Bliss and Lømo discovered that the
inothercellsofthebody.Indeed,the cAMPsystemis synapticconnectionswithinthehippocampusundergo
oneofthemostprimitiveandevolutionarilyconserved. long-termpotentiation(LTP).WewillconsiderLTPfirst.
Itistheonlymajorsecondmessengersystemfoundin WorkinginPerAndersen’slaboratoryinOslo,Norway,
unicellularorganismslikebacteria,whereitservesasa Timothy Bliss and Terje Lømo first demonstrated that
systemtosignalhunger. thesynapsesofthehippocampushaveremarkableplas-
As these arguments suggest, what may make the tic capabilities of the kind that would be required for
cAMP–PKA–CREBpathwaysuitableasacorepathway memory storage (Bliss and Lømo, 1973). A brief high
formemorystorageistheadditionofcertainadditional frequency train of action potentials in any one of the
components. For example, in neurons, unlike in other threemajoranatomicalpathwayswithinthehippocam-
cells,PKAactssynergisticallywithMAPK,akinaseoften pus produces a long-term potentiation (LTP), an in-
involvedinthe regulationofgrowthandintheremoval crease in synaptic strength in that pathway that has
ofinhibitoryconstraintstogrowth.PKAandMAPKlead beenshowntolastforhoursinananesthetizedanimal
to the activation of CREB and to the induction of im- andfordaysandevenweeks inanalert,freely moving
mediate-early genes, one of which—the ubiquitin hy- animal. LTPhas several features that make it suitable
drolase—isneuronspecific.Thehydrolaseinturnleads asastoragemechanism.First,itisfoundtooccurwithin
tothe activationofubiquitin-mediated proteolysisand eachofthethreeprincipalpathwaysinthehippocampus
theestablishmentofapersistentlyactivePKA,thefirst (Figure9):theperforantpathway,themossyfiberpath-
step downstream from CREB-1 in the long-term se- way,andtheSchaffercollateralpathway(BlissandCol-
quence. lingridge,1993).Second,itisrapidlyinduced:itcanbe
Inretrospect,whatweareseeinginmemorystorage induced by a single, high frequency train of electrical
illustratesakeyprinciplein biologicalregulations.The stimuli. Third, once induced, it is stable for 1 hour to
dominant idea to emerge from the molecular studyof many hoursor evendaysdependinguponthenumber
cellularregulation—the cell cycle, signal transduction, of repetitionsof the inducingstimulus.Thus, asis the
apoptosis,cellgrowth,andoncogenesis—isthatbiolog- case forlong-term facilitation in Aplysia,LTP has fea-
icalprocesses areremarkablyconserved.Perhaps the tures of the memory process itself. It can be formed
mostremarkableexamplehasemergedfromstudiesof quicklyatappropriatesynapsesanditlastsalongtime.
development. The genes involved in the formation of LTPinthethreecanonicalsynapsesofthehippocampus
the body plan of vertebrates derives from genes and has two forms. Mossy fiber LTP is nonassociative; it
genetic pathways evident in Drosophila and C. ele- doesnotrequirecoincidentactivityinboththepre-and
gans—eventhoughthevertebratebodyplanbearslittle postsynapticelementsofthesynapse.Bycontrast,LTP
resemblanceto thatof thefly andevenlessto thatof in the perforant pathwayand inthe Schaffer collateral
theworm.Indeed,these samegenesareutilizedagain pathway isassociative; itrequires coincidentpre- and
inthe formationofthevertebrate brain. postsynaptic activity. Because genetic lesions that in-
terfereselectivelywith mossyfiberLTPin micedonot
affect the animal’s capability for spatial or contextual
MolecularInsightsintoDeclarative memory(Huangetal.,1995),wefocushereontheSchaf-
MemoryStorage fer collateral pathway between the presynaptic CA3
Dothemechanismsfordeclarativememoryinmammals neuronsand theCA1 postsynaptic targetcells.Wedo
differfromthosefornondeclarativememoryininverte- so because it is the best studied synapticpathway in
brates?Aswehavediscussedabove,experimentalani- the hippocampus and because genetic lesions ofLTP
mals cannot declare anything; nevertheless, methods in thispathwaycanleadto memorydeficits.
have been developed to explore in simple mammals, TheSchaffercollateralaxonsinthehippocampususe
suchasmice,formsofmemorystoragethathavemany glutamateastheirtransmitter.GlutamateproducesLTP
ofthecriticalfeaturesofdeclarativememory.Declara- byactingpostsynapticallyonatleasttwotypesofrecep-
tive memory storage is concerned with the ability to tors:NMDA receptors andnon-NMDAreceptors. Non-
recallorrecognizepeople,places,andobjects.Rodents NMDA receptors mediate basal synaptic transmission

Neuron
460
Figure9. LTPandtheMedialTemporalLobe
(A)Flowdiagramfortheflowofinformationinthemedialtemporallobe.
(B)ModelofearlyandlatephaseofLTPinSchaffercollateralpathway.
becausetheionchannelassociatedwiththeNMDAre- etal., 1989; Malinow etal., 1989),(2) protein kinase C
ceptorisblockedbymagnesiumattherestingpotential. (Malinow,1988),and(3) the tyrosinekinasefyn(O’Dell
TheNMDA receptoris unblockedonly when the post- etal., 1990;Grantetal., 1992).
synaptic cell is depolarized.Thus, the NMDA receptor TheinductionofLTPclearlydependsonpostsynaptic
has associative or coincidence-detecting properties. depolarization,theinfluxofcalcium,andthesubsequent
Optimal activation of the NMDA receptor channel re- activationofsecond-messengerkinasesinthepostsyn-
quires that the two signals—the binding of glutamate aptic cell. By contrast, the site for the expression or
tothereceptorandthedepolarizationofthepostsynap- maintenance of LTP, be it presynaptic, postsynaptic,
tic cell—occur simultaneously (Bliss and Collingridge, or both, is still debated (Bliss and Collingridge, 1993;
1993). Oncethe NMDA receptoris activated, it allows KullmanandSiegelbaum,1995).
calcium influx into the postsynaptic cell. As was first As with memory storage in intact animals, LTP has
shownbyGaryLynchandthenbyRogerNicoll(reviewed bothshort-termandlong-termphasesasdoesfacilita-
byBlissandCollingridge,1993),calciuminfluxintothe tion in Aplysia (Figure 9). One stimulus train produces
postsynaptic neuroniscriticalfortheinductionofLTP a short-termearly phase of LTP(called E-LTP) lasting
(Figure 9). The Ca2(cid:49) influx initiates LTP by activating, 1–3hours;thisphasedoesnotrequireproteinsynthesis.
directly or indirectly,atleastthreedifferentproteinki- Four or morestimulus trainsinduce a morepersistent
nases:(1)calcium/calmodulinproteinkinaseII(Malenka late phase ofLTP (calledL-LTP) thatlasts for atleast

Review:Milner,Squire,andKandel
461
24hours(Freyetal.,1993;Abel,1997).LatephaseLTP genes interfered with spatial memory. However, the
requires the synthesis of new mRNAand protein, and studieswerelimitedbothspatiallyandtemporally(May-
itrecruits the cAMP,PKA,MAPK, andCREB signaling fordetal.,1996):(1)thegenewaseliminatednotjustin
pathway.Thus,althoughthemolecularmechanismsfor the Schaffer collateral pathway but in all parts of the
E-LTPdifferfromthoseusedforshort-termfacilitation brain, and (2) the gene was eliminated throughout all
in Aplysia, the hippocampus uses a conserved set of developmentandcouldinprinciplehaveinterferedwith
mechanismsforconvertingE-LTPtoL-LTP.Recentcel- the formationofthebasic wiring ofthe hippocampus.
lularphysiological studies suggest thatthe late phase More recently, a second generation of genetically
ofLTPmightalsoinvolvetheformationofnewsynapses modifiedmicehasbeenusedtoaddressthesetwoprob-
(Greenough and Bailey, 1988; Geinisman et al., 1991; lems. For example, Tsien et al. (1996a) developed a
Bolshakovetal.,1997). methodforproducingaknockoutofgenesrestrictedto
thepyramidalcellsoftheCA1region.Tsienetal.(1996b)
then used this method to knock out the R1 subunit
GeneticInterferencewithLTP Interferes of the NMDA receptor. These mice had normal basal
withSpatialMemory synaptictransmission,butLTPintheSchaffercollateral
EventhoughLTPhasfeaturesthatmakeitattractiveas pathway was completely disrupted. Although the dis-
amemorymechanism,itis notyetclearthatthisisthe ruption of LTP is restricted to the Schaffer collateral
mechanismthatthehippocampususestostoredeclara- pathway,thesemiceneverthelesshaveadeficitinspa-
tive memoriessuch asspatial memory (Barnes, 1995; tial memory. These findings provide compelling evi-
Goda and Stevens, 1996). To begin with, LTP is not dencethatNMDAreceptors andNMDA-mediatedsyn-
unique tothe hippocampus,or to declarative formsof aptic plasticity in the Schaffer collateral pathway are
memory.Asweshallconsiderbelow,it isusedforthe importantfordeclarative memory.
storageofemotionallychargednondeclarativememory However, gene knockouts, no matter how limitedin
intheamygdalaanditcontributestoclassicalcondition- theiranatomicaldistribution,havethepotentialproblem
ingininvertebratessuchasAplysiathatdonothave(as thatthedefectinLTPandspatialmemorycouldconceiv-
farasweknow)declarativeformsofmemory(Daleand ablyresultfromadevelopmentaldefectinthewiringof
Kandel, 1993; Lin and Glanzman, 1994; Murphy and theSchaffercollateralpathway.Althoughunlikelyinthe
Glanzman, 1997; Bao et al., 1997, 1998). Second, the studyofTsienetal.(1996),thispossibilitycanbeelimi-
highfrequenciestypicallyusedtoinduceLTParearbi- natedbyregulatingexpressionofatransgenethatinter-
traryandartificial.ItisnotatallclearwhethertheSchaf- fereswithLTP.Thus,withthisideainmind,Mayfordet
fer collateral pathway (or any hippocampal pathway) al.(1996)expressedin differentlinesofmicea persis-
everis exposed tothese particular frequencies during tentlyactiveformofthecalcium/calmodulin-dependent
learning.Rather than assuming thatLTP is specific to protein kinase II in a regulated manner thatallowed it
declarativememoryitismorelikelythatLTP,asstudied to be turned on and off. The mutated gene product
experimentally, represents an example of a class of interferedwiththe LTPproducedbylowstimulationin
mechanismsforchangingsynapticstrengththatmight the theta frequencies (1–10 Hz), a physiological fre-
beusedformemorystorage. quency recruited in the hippocampus when a mouse
Toexamine whether thisrange ofcapabilities in the exploresanenvironment.Theselinesofmicewerealso
Schaffercollateralpathwayis involvedinspatialmem- deficient in spatial learning and memory. When the
ory, it is important to show that blocking LTP in this transgene was turned off, however, both LTPand the
pathwayblocks long-termmemory and thatstoringof animal’scapabilityforspatiallearningandmemorywere
along-termmemoryleadstoLTPinthesehippocampal restored. Thesetwo findingsmake it clear thatLTPin
pathways.IfLTPrepresentsaclassofsynapticmecha- the Schaffer collateral pathway is essential forspatial
nismsforestablishingdeclarativespatialmemory,then memory.TheroleofLTPinthispathwayisquitespecific.
defectsinLTPshouldinterferewithspatial memory. Asmentionedabove,selectivegeneticlesionsofmossy
Theinitialevidenceforthiscorrelationwasprovided fiberLTPhadnoeffectonspatialmemory(Huangetal.,
by Morris and his colleagues, who found that when 1994).
NMDA receptorswere blocked pharmacologically LTP Aswediscussedearlier, LTPhasbothearlyandlate
wasblockedandananimalcouldnavigateawatermaze phases.DefectsinthevariousphasesofLTParesurpris-
successfullybutcouldnotformspatialmemories.More ingly selective. Expression in the hippocampus of a
direct evidence for thiscorrelation came fromgenetic transgenethat blocksproteinkinase Aselectively dis-
experiments.Formanyyears,mutationalgeneticanaly- rupted the late phase ofLTPin the Schaffer collateral
sesofbehaviorwerenotfeasibleinmammals.However, pathway (Abel et al., 1997).Asimilar defect is evident
in the 1980s and 1990s, methods were developed for inanimalsthathaveaselectivelesionintheCREBgene
expressingor deletingspecificgenesin mice.Asare- (Bourtchouladzeetal.,1994).Animalswiththesedeficits
sult, it became possible to determine how changes in had normal learning abilities and normal short-term
theexpressionofasinglegeneaffectLTPinthehippo- memory when testedat1hourafter learning,but they
campus,andhowsuchachangeinLTPaffectsspatial did not convert short-term memory into stable long-
memory in the intact, freely behaving animal. These termmemory.Essentiallysimilarresultswereobtained
technicaladvanceswerefirstappliedtostudiesofmem- when normal wild-type mice were given inhibitors of
orybySilvaetal.(1992a,1992b)andGrantetal.(1992). protein synthesis just before training. Taken together,
TheseearlystudiesshowedthatinterferencewithLTPin theseexperimentsshowthatinterferencewiththeearly
theSchaffercollateralpathwaybyknockingoutspecific component of LTP in the Schaffer collateral pathway,

Neuron
462
as with knockout of NMDAR or with blockers of the the various associationcortices that process informa-
NMDAreceptor,alsoblocksthelatecomponentofLTP tionforperceptionprojecttotheperirhinalandparahip-
and therefore is correlated with deficitsin both short- pocampalcortices,whichinturnprojecttotheentorhi-
and long-termmemory. By contrast, interference with nal cortex, which projects through several pathways
the late component of LTPis correlated only with im- in the dentate gyrus and the hippocampus. From the
pairedlong-termmemory. dentategyrus,themain pathwaywithinthehippocam-
pusflowstotheCA3regionandthentotheCA1region
GeneticInterferencewithLTPIsReflected of the hippocampus, and then to the subiculum, the
inthe Propertiesof PlaceCells outputcomponent, which in turn projects back to the
inthe Hippocampus associationcorticesthroughtheentorhinalcortex.Thus,
Long-termpotentiationinthehippocampusisanartifi- the task of understanding how sensory information is
ciallyinducedchangeinsynapticstrengthproducedby processedforany given memory,such asmemoryfor
electricalstimulationofsynapticpathways.Isthisform spatial location, is daunting. Beyondthat, thereis the
ofsynapticplasticityusedphysiologicallyinthestorage challenge for each of these relays of relating LTP to
ofspatial memories?Isit usedforthedevelopment of memorystorage.
amapofspace?FollowingonO’Keefe’soriginalobser- Although region-specific promoters and regulated
vation, avarietyofstudies haveshown thatpyramidal geneexpressionshouldhelpinundertakingananalysis
cellscanencoderelationshipsbetweenfeaturesofthe ofthecontributionsofeachoftheseregionstomemory
environmentthatarecriticallyrelevanttoalearningtask. storage, the precise form ofLTP that is required—the
Specifically,thesamepyramidalcellsthatundergoLTP patternofstimulationthatiscriticalinagivenregionof
whentheirafferentpathwaysarestimulatedelectrically
the system—will be difficult to infer. As a result, the
canalsoencodethelocationofananimalinaparticular
analysis ofwhatroleLTPservesinmemory storagein
space.Thus, amouse’slocationisrepresentedbythe
themammalianbrainshouldbenefitfromareductionist
dischargeofauniquepopulationofhippocampalplace
approachsimilartothekindthathasproveninformative
cells,eachofwhichdischargeswhentheanimalisina
in invertebrates. As a first step, it will prove useful to
particulararea(thecell’s“placefield”).Whentheanimal
analyze LTP in the context of simple, nondeclarative
entersanewenvironment,newplacefieldsareformed
formsofmemory,suchasconditionedeyeblinkorcon-
withinminutes,andtheyarestableforweekstomonths.
ditionedfear.Weheredescriberecentstudiesofcondi-
Thesamepyramidalcellsmaysignaldifferentinforma-
tionedfear.
tionindifferentenvironmentsandcanthereforebeused
One of the major advances in the study of emotion
in morethanonespatialmap.
hasbeentherealizationthattheamygdalaiscriticalfor
The rapid formation and persistence of place fields
itsexpression. Inhumans, electrical stimulation of the
offersanopportunitytoask:howareplacefieldsformed,
amygdalaproduces feelingsoffearandapprehension.
andonceformed,howaretheymaintained?IsLTPim-
Moreover, functional MRI studies have revealed that
portantfortheformationormaintenanceofplacefields?
stimulithatelicitfearaffectbloodflowtotheamygdala
Toaddressthesequestions,placecellswereexamined
inhumans(reviewedbyLeDoux,1995).Inexperimental
byMcHughetal.(1996)andbyRotenbergetal.(1996)
animals,theamygdalasimilarlyisessentialforbothin-
in thetwo typesofmutant micegeneratedbyTsienet
stinctiveandlearned (conditioned)expressions offear
al.andMayford etal., whichwe consideredabove.As
wesaw,eachofthemutations interfereswithLTPin a (Davisetal.,1994;LeDoux, 1995,1996).
different way. LTP was not required for the formation Inexperimentalanimals,conditionedfearisproduced
ofplacefieldsineithertypeofmutant.Bycontrast,LTP bypairinganeutraltone(CS)withafear-inducingelec-
was required for the fine tuning of place cells and for tric shock to the foot pads (US). Auditory information
theirstabilityacrosstime.Thisinstabilityofplacecells critical forconditioning of fear reaches the lateral nu-
isreminiscentofthememorydefectinseverelyamnesic cleusofthe amygdalavia two routes:fromthe medial
patientswithlesionsofthemedialtemporallobe.Each geniculatenucleusofthethalamusandfromtheauditory
time these patients enter the same place (so long as cortex(LeDoux,1995,1996;MarenandFanselow,1995).
the placewas notknownto thembeforetheybecame Thesynapsesofbothoftheseprojectionstothelateral
amnesic),theybehaveasiftheyhaveneverbeenthere nucleusarethoughttobeimportantformemorystorage
before.Takentogether, thesetwo studiesofknockout relatedtofear(Chapmanetal.,1990;Roganetal.,1995,
mice lacking the R1 subunit of the NMDA receptorin 1997; McKernan and Shinnick-Gallagher, 1997). Both
CA1andtransgenicmiceoverexpressingapersistently auditorypathwaysundergoNMDA-dependentLTP(Clug-
active form of calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein netandLeDoux,1990;MarenandFanselow,1995),and
kinase IIsuggestthatLTPisimportant formaintaining blocking the NMDA receptor blocks conditioned fear
acoherentspatialmap. (Miserendino et al., 1990; Fanselow and Kim, 1994).
Moreover,recent studies haveshown that fear condi-
TheStudyofEmotionallyChargedNondeclarative tioninginducesLTPintheauditoryinputtothebasolat-
MemoriesMay ProvetoBeParticularly eral nucleus (McKernan andShinnick-Gallagher, 1997;
Advantageousfor Determiningwhich Rogan et al., 1997). This LTP is mediated by NMDA
Aspectsof LTPAre MostDirectly receptors.Thus,asisthecasefornondeclarativemem-
RequiredforMemoryStorage ory storage in invertebrates, a structure essential for
inthe MammalianBrain memorystorage—theamygdala—isdirectlyinthepath-
As we have seen, the medial temporal-lobe memory way of the conditioned stimulus, the auditory input.
systemthatsupportsdeclarativeformsofmemorystor- Applying amolecular genetic approachto thissystem
ageiscomplexandhasseveralanatomicalcomponents: may prove to be a good initial strategy for analyzing

Review:Milner,Squire,andKandel
463
exactlywhichaspectsofLTPareimportantformemory change theirresponsepropertiesasaresultofbehav-
storage. ioral experience (Merzenich and Sameshima, 1993). It
waslongbelievedthatthestructureofoursensorycorti-
cal areas must be fixed to guarantee the stability of
MolecularSimilaritiesbetweenDeclarative
perception. However, recent work on plasticity in the
andNondeclarativeMemory
sensorycorticeshasintroducedtheideathatthestruc-
On a cognitive level, declarative and nondeclarative
ture of the brain, even in sensory cortex, is unique to
memory differ dramatically. They use a different logic
each individual and dependent on each individual’s
(consciousversusunconsciousrecall),andthememo-
experientialhistory.Forexample,structuralchangesin-
riesarestoredindifferentbrainareas.However,despite
duced by behavioral training in the rat occur in task-
these differences on the cognitive and systems level,
relevant areas of cortex or cerebellum and include in-
thetwowaysofstoringmemoryshareseveralmolecular
creasesintheamountofdendriteperneuronandinthe
stepsin common.
numberofsynapsesperneuron(Greenoughetal.,1996).
Tobeginwith,bothnondeclarativememory—asstud-
Although the findings are correlational and cannot be
iedinAplysia,Drosophila,andforemotionalmemoriesin
definitivelylinkedtolearningperse,theydocumentthe
rodents—anddeclarativeformsofmemorydemonstrate
considerable capacity of the mature nervous system
stagesofmemory storage: on a behaviorallevel there
to modify its anatomical circuitry. Similarly, monkeys
isbothashort-termmemorythatdoesnotrequirenew
trainedtousetheirfingersactivelyinatactilediscrimina-
proteinsynthesisandalong-termmemorythatrequires
tiontaskreorganizedthesensorycorticalmap(area3b)
newproteinsynthesis.Thecellularrepresentationofshort-
of their hand area and expanded the area that repre-
termmemoryineach caseinvolvescovalentmodifica-
sented the stimulated fingers (Merzenich and Same-
tionsofpre-existingproteinsbyoneoranothersecond
shima,1993).Finally,italsoappearslikelythatthegrad-
messengerkinase.Bycontrast,thecellularrepresenta-
ualgrowthofcorticalaxons,includingaproliferationof
tionoflong-termmemoryinvolvesnewproteinsynthe-
newsynapticterminals,isinvolvedinsomephenomena
sis. Moreover, at least some examples of both forms
ofperceptual learning(Gilbert, 1998).
seemto share acommon switch forconverting short-
term to long-term memory, the switch’s components
being cAMP, PKA, MAPK, and CREB-mediated tran-
CognitiveNeuroscienceinthe Context
scription of downstream genes. Finally, both forms
of theLast SixDecades
appear to use morphological changes at synapses to
As Neuron prepares to enter the twenty-first century,
stabilizelong-termmemory (Abeletal.,1995).
theneurosciences,whosesix decadesofachievement
These several findings have given us a new set of
wecelebrateinthisissueofthejournal,havematured.
insights intoboth memory storageand intothe evolu-
With this maturation, the neurosciences now have
tionaryconservationunderlyingthemolecularunderpin-
movedfromtheperipheralpositiontheyoccupiedinthe
ningsof mental processes.Althoughmemory involves
1940s to a central position within the biological sci-
avarietyofdifferentdeclarativeandnondeclarativepro-
ences. There has been remarkable progress in under-
cesses, what is conserved in many of these storage
standing neuronal and synaptic signaling. These ad-
processesisnotsimplyasetofgenesandproteinsbut
vancesnowinviteastructuralapproachtovisualizethe
entire signaling pathways and programs for inducing
static and dynamic structures of ion channels, recep-
and stabilizing long-term memory storage. Moreover,
tors,andthemolecularmachineryforvesicletransport,
thehomologydoesnotsimplyextendfromnondeclara-
fusion,andexocytosis.
tive to declarative memory—it extends from inverte-
Similarly,anunderstandinginoutlineofthedevelop-
bratessuchasDrosophilaandAplysiaandtomammals
ment of the nervous system has been achieved by a
suchasmice.Takentogether,thestudiesinDrosophila,
molecular approach. Specific molecules have been
Aplysia,androdentssuggestthatthese quitedifferent
identifiedasinducersandmorphogens,constructsthat
typesofmemoryprocesses,involvingdistinctneuronal
previously were shrouded in mystery. Progress in this
systemsforstorage,shareacommonsetofmolecular
areahasinturnmadepossibleamolecular-basedneu-
mechanismsfortheconsolidationofshort-termtolong-
rology,aneurologythatwill,onehopes,finallybeable
termmemory.
to address thedegenerativediseases ofthe brainthat
Lookedatfromanotherperspective,studiesofsynap-
haveforso longeludedourbestscientificefforts.
ticplasticityemphasizestillanotherfeatureofmolecular
Theremarkableadvancesinthecellularunderstand-
andfunctionalconservation.Thereareasyetnoforms
ingoftheorganizationofthesomatosensoryandvisual
ofplasticityevidentinthevertebrate brainthatarenot
system by Vernon Mountcastle and Hubel and Wiesel
alreadyfoundin invertebrates.
have helpedturn our interestto perception andin the
broadersensetocognitivepsychology.Inturn,contact
StructuralChangesMay ProvetoBeaGeneral between cognitive psychology and neuroscience has
MechanismforStabilizingFunctional givenusanewapproachtotheclassicproblemsofthe
ChangesinBothNondeclarativeand mindsuchasmemory—onwhichwehaveherefocused.
DeclarativeMemorySystems But, of all the fields in neuroscience, in fact, of all
Boththeworkon structuralchangesinnondeclarative the fields in all of science, the problems of cognitive
memoryandthatonthepossiblestructuralchangesin neuroscience—theproblemsofperception,action,mem-
the hippocampus related to declarative memory have ory, attention, and consciousness on an intellectually
beenparalleledbystudiesofneocorticalneurons,dem- satisfying biological level—offer the most difficult and
onstratingaconsiderablecapacityoftheseneuronsto the greatest challenge for the next millennium. In the

Neuron
464
fullness of time, advance in these areas may grant inthehippocampusreflectedinourconsciousrecollec-
us insight into and perhaps solutions for some of the tion of a space? That of course leads to a still larger
mostdebilitatingdiseasesconfrontingmedicalscience— question: how does declarative information become
schizophrenia, depression,andAlzheimer’sdisease. availabletoconsciousintrospection?Howarenonspa-
We have here focused on only one component of tial memories that are declarative represented in the
cognitiveneuroscience,thatofmemory.Asweindicated hippocampus?Howisittransformedfromahippocam-
in the introduction, the problem of memory has two pal-dependentprocesstoahippocampal-independent
components—the molecular problem of memory and andpresumablyneocortical-dependentprocessthatis
thesystemsproblemofmemory.Inthelastfourdecades capable of being scanned by conscious attention in
substantialprogresshas occurredin bothareas. ways that we are still very far from understanding?
Onthemolecularlevel,acoresignalingpathwayhas ClearlyoneDecadeoftheBrain(andofNeuron)hasnot
beenidentifiedthatisusedinavarietyofnondeclarative beenenough.Willamillenniumsuffice?
anddeclarativeformsofmemorytoconvertshort-term
to long-term memory.Thus, these two major forms of
References
memoryusecommonelementarymechanismsforstor-
age.MostlikelythecAMP–PKA–MAPK–CREBpathway
Abel, T., Alberini,C., Ghirardi,M.,Huang, Y.-Y.,Nguyen,P.,and
representsonlyoneofwhatis likelytobeseveralcore Kandel,E.R.(1995).Stepstowardamoleculardefinitionofmemory
mechanismsforachievingthistransformation.Thetasks consolidation.InMemoryDistortion,D.L.Schacter,ed.(Cambridge,
aheadforadeeperunderstandingofmolecularmecha- MA:HarvardUniversityPress),pp.298–325.
nismsarefairlyclear.Althoughwenowknowsomething Abel,T.,Nguyen,P.V.,Barad,M.,Deuel,T.A.S.,Kandel,E.R.,and
abouttheswitchfromshort-termtolong-termmemory, Bourtchouladze,R.(1997).GeneticdemonstrationofaroleforPKA
we know only a small percentage of the downstream inthelatephaseofLTPandinhippocampus-basedlong-termmem-
ory.Cell88,615–626.
genesandproteins,forexample,the proteinsrequired
Abel,T.,Martin,K.C.,Bartsch,D.,andKandel,E.R.(1998).Memory
forthegrowthofnewsynapticconnections.Drosophila,
suppressor genes: inhibitory constraints onthe storage of long-
Aplysia,andperhaps C. elegansshouldcontribute im-
termmemory.Science279,338–341.
portantly to further gene discovery. Because we now
Aceves-Pin˜a,E.O.,Booker,R.,Duerr,J.S.,Livingstone,M.S.,Quinn,
knowthatthemolecularmechanismsareatleastinpart W.G.,Smith,R.F.,Sziber,P.P.,Tempel,B.L.,andTully,T.P.(1983).
sharedacrossspeciesandformsofmemory,italsowill Learning and memory inDrosophila, studied with mutants. Cold
be important to direct this molecular analysis to the SpringHarborSymp.Quant.Biol.48,831–840.
simpler instances of nondeclarative memory in mice, Adolphs,R.,Cahill,L.,Schul,R.,andBabinsky,R.(1997).Impaired
usingfearconditioningandtheamygdalaandeyeblink declarativememoryforemotionalmaterialfollowingbilateralamyg-
conditioning and the vestibulo-ocular reflex, whose daladamageinhumans.Learn.Mem.4,291–300.
modifications occur in the cerebellum and its deep Alberini,C.M.,Ghirardi,M.,Mertz,R.,andKandel,E.R.(1994).C/EBP
isanimmediate-earlygenerequiredfortheconsolidationoflong-
nuclei.
termfacilitationinAplysia.Cell76,1099–1114.
Thegreatestchallenges,however,liein thesystems
Alkon, D.L. (1974). Associative training in Hermissenda. J. Gen.
biology of memory and in particular in the biology of
Physiol.64,70–84.
declarative,consciousmemory.Wedonot,asyet,un-
Alvarez,P.,andSquire,L.R.(1994).Memoryconsolidationandthe
derstandthefunctionsofthevarioussubdivisionsofthe
medialtemporallobe: asimplenetwork model.Proc.Natl.Acad.
medial temporal-lobe system. Analyses of perception Sci.USA91,7041–7045.
indicatethatthevisualimageisdeconstructedandpro- Bacskai,B.J.,Hochner,B.,Mahoaut-Smith,M.,Adams,S.R.,Kaang,
cessed in the cortex in a series ofparallel processing B.-K.,Kandel,E.R.,andTsien,R.Y.(1993).Spatiallyresolveddynam-
streams. However, despite clear evidence for parallel icsofcAMPandproteinkinaseAsubunitsinAplysiasensoryneu-
anatomical pathways in the hippocampus, it has not rons.Science260,222–226.
beenpossibletodelineatetheirfunctionalsignificance. Bailey,C.H.,andChen,M.(1983).Morphologicalbasisoflong-term
habituationandsensitizationinAplysia.Science220,91–93.
By analogy to the visual system, it would seem likely
that differentregions ofthe medialtemporal-lobe sys- Bailey,C.H., and Chen, M.(1988). Long-term memoryin Aplysia
modulatesthetotalnumberofvaricositiesofsingleidentifiedsen-
tem (the parahippocampal and perirhinal cortices, the
soryneurons.Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA85,2372–2377.
entorhinal cortex,thedentategyrus, theCA1 andCA3
Bailey,C.H.,Chen,M.,Keller,F.,andKandel,E.R.(1992).Serotonin-
regions of the hippocampus, andthe subiculum) have
mediatedendocytosisofapCAM:anearlystepoflearning-related
specialized functional roles in memory storage: they synapticgrowthinAplysia.Science256,645–649.
might each mediate the store of different aspects of
Bao,J.-X.,Kandel,E.R.,andHawkins,R.D.(1997).Involvementof
learnedinformation(Figure9).Alternatively,memoryit- pre-and postsynapticmechanismsin posttetanicpotentiationin
selfrequiresseveraloperationssuchasencoding,stor- Aplysiasynapses.Science275,969–973.
age, consolidation, and retrieval. Perhaps differentre- Bao,J.-X.,Kandel,E.R.,andHawkins,R.D.(1998).Involvementof
gions carryout these differenttypes ofoperations.To pre- andpostsynapticmechanisms inpairing-specific facilitation
interveneineachofthecriticalregionsandexploreeach byserotoninatAplysiasensory-motorneuronsynapsesinisolated
cellculture.J.Neurosci.18,458–466.
of these component processes, we will need further
improvementsin geneticmethods. Barnes,C.A.(1995).InvolvementofLTPinmemory:arewe“search-
ingunderthestreetlight”?Neuron15,751–754.
Italsowillbeimportanttounderstandhow acquired
Bartsch,D.,Ghirardi,M.,Skehel,P.A.,Karl,K.A.,Herder,S.P.,Chen,
representations in the hippocampus act to support
M.,Bailey,C.H.,andKandel,E.R.(1995).AplysiaCREB2represses
memory. Forexample,how does the spatialmap,evi-
long-termfacilitation:reliefofrepressionconvertstransientfacilita-
dentinthehippocampus,relatetospatialmemory?How tion into long-term functional and structural change. Cell 83,
is thisspatialmapreadout? Howisthe mapofspace 979–992.

Review:Milner,Squire,andKandel
465
Benzer, S. (1967). Behavioral mutants of Drosophila isolated by Cho,Y.H.,andKesner,R.P.(1996).Involvementofentorhinalcortex
counter-currentdistribution.Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA58,1112– orparietalcortexinlong-termspatialdiscriminationmemoryinrats:
1119. retrogradeamnesia.Behav.Neurosci.110,436–442.
Bliss,T.V.P.,andLømo,T.(1973).Long-lastingpotentiationofsyn- Cho,Y.H.,Beracochea,D.,andJaffard,R.(1993).Extendedtemporal
aptictransmissioninthedentateareaoftheanaesthetizedrabbit gradientfortheretrogradeandanterogradeamnesiaproducedby
followingstimulationoftheperforantpath.J.Physiol.(Lond.)232, ibotenateentorhinalcortexlesionsinmice.J.Neurosci.13,1759–
331–356. 1766.
Bliss,T.V.,andCollingridge,G.L.(1993).Asynapticmodelofmem- Cleary,L.J.,Byrne,J.,andFrost,W.(1995).Roleofinterneuronsin
ory:long-termpotentiationinthehippocampus.Nature361,31–39. defensivewithdrawalreflexesinAplysia.Learn.Mem.2,133–151.
Bolhuis,J.,Stewart,C.A.,andForest,E.M.(1994).Retrogradeamne- Clugnet,M.C.,andLeDoux,J.E.(1990).Synapticplasticityinfear
siaandmemoryreactivationinrats withibotenate lesionstothe conditioningcircuits:inductionofLTPinthelateralnucleusofthe
hippocampusorsubiculum.Quart.J.Exp.Psychol.47,129–150. amygdalabystimulationofthemedialgeniculatebody.J.Neurosci.
10,2818–2824.
Bolshakov, V.Y., Golan, H., Kandel, E.R., and Siegelbaum, S.A.
(1997).Recruitmentofnewsitesofsynaptictransmissionduringthe Cohen,N.J.,andSquire,L.R.(1980).Preservedlearningandreten-
cAMP-dependentlatephaseof LTPatCA3–CA1synapsesinthe tionofpatternanalyzingskillinamnesia:dissociationofknowing
hippocampus.Neuron19,635–651. howandknowingthat.Science210,207–209.
Bourtchouladze,R.,Frenguelli,B.,Blendy,J.,Cioffi,D.,Schutz,G., Connolly,J.B.,Roberts,I.J.H.,Armstrong,D.,Kaiser,K.,Forte,M.,
andSilva,A.J.(1994).Deficientlong-term memoryinmice witha Tully,T.,andO’Kane,C.J.(1996).Associativelearningdisruptedby
targetedmutationofthecAMP-responsiveelement-bindingprotein. impairedGssignalinginDrosophilamushroombodies.Science274,
Cell79,59–68. 2104–2106.
Brunelli,M.,Castellucci,V.F.,andKandel,E.R.(1976).Synapticfacil- Corkin, S. (1965). Tactuallyguidedmazelearning inman:effects
itationandbehavioralsensitizationinAplysia:possibleroleofsero- of unilateral corticalexcisions andbilateralhippocampal lesions.
toninandcAMP.Science194,1178–1181. Neuropsychologia3,339–351.
Byers,D.,Davis,R.L.,andKiger,J.A.(1981).DefectincyclicAMP Corkin,S.,Amaral,D.G.,Gonzalez,R.G.,Johnson,K.A.,andHyman,
phosphodiesterasedueto theduncemutationoflearninginDro- B.T.(1997).H.M.’smedialtemporallobelesion:findingsfrommag-
sophilamelanogaster.Nature289,79–81. neticresonanceimaging.J.Neurosci.17,3964–3980.
Byrne,J.H.,andKandel,E.R.(1995).Presynapticfacilitationrevis- Dale,H.,andKandel,E.R.(1993).L-glutamatemaybethefastexcit-
ited:stateandtimedependence.J.Neurosci.16,425–435. atorytransmitterofAplysiasensoryneurons.Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.
USA90,7163–7167.
Cahill,L.,Haier,R.J.,Fallon, J.,Alkire, M.T.,Tang,C.,Keator,D.,
Wu,J.,andMcGaugh,J.L.(1996).Amygdalaactivity atencoding Damasio,A.R.(1995).Descartes’Error:emotion,Reason,andthe
correlatedwithlong-term,freerecallofemotionalinformation.Proc. HumanBrain(NewYork:G.P.Putnam’sSons).
Natl.Acad.Sci.USA93,8016–8021. Davis, G.W.,Schuster, C.M.,andGoodman, C.S. (1996).Genetic
Cajal,S.R.(1894).Lafinestructuredescentresnerveux. Proc.R. dissectionofstructuralandfunctionalcomponentsofsynapticplas-
Soc.Lond.55,444–468. ticity. III.CREB isnecessaryfor presynapticfunctionalplasticity.
Neuron17,669–679.
Carew,T.J.,andSahley,C.J.(1986).Invertebratelearningandmem-
Davis,H.P.,andSquire,L.R.(1984).Proteinsynthesisandmemory:
ory:frombehavioraltomolecules.Annu.Rev.Neurosci.9,435–487.
areview.Psychol.Bull.96,518–559.
Carew,T.J.,Pinsker,H.M.,andKandel,E.R.(1972).Long-termhabit-
Davis,M.,Walker,D.L.,andLee,Y.(1997).Amygdalaandbednu-
uation of a defensive withdrawal reflex in Aplysia. Science 175,
cleus of thestria terminalis: differentialroles in fear andanxiety
451–454.
measuredwiththeacousticstartlereflex.Phil.Trans.Biol.Sci.352,
Carew,T.J.,Castellucci,V.F.,andKandel,E.R.(1979).Sensitization 1675–1687.
inAplysia:restorationoftransmissioninsynapses inactivatedby
Davis,R.L.(1996).PhysiologyandbiochemistryofDrosophilalearn-
long-termhabituation.Science205,417–419.
ingmutants.Physiol.Rev.76,299–317.
Castellucci,V.F.,andKandel,E.R.(1974).Aquantalanalysisofthe
Davis,W.J.,andGillette,R.(1978).Neuralcorrrelateofbehavioral
synaptic depressionunderlying habituation ofthe gill-withdrawal
plasticity incommandneuronsof Pleurobranchaea.Science199,
reflexinAplysia.Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA71,5004–5008.
801–804.
Castellucci,V.F.,andKandel,E.R.(1976).Presynapticfacilitationas
Drachman,D.A.,andArbib,J.(1966).Memoryandthehippocampal
amechanismforbehavioral sensitizationinAplysia.Science194,
complex.Arch.Neurol.15,52–61.
1176–1178.
Drain, P., Folkers, E., and Quinn, W.G. (1991). cAMP-dependent
Castellucci, V.F., Pinsker, H., Kupfermann, I., and Kandel, E.R.
protein kinase and the disruption of learning in transgenic flies.
(1970).Neuronalmechanismsofhabituationanddishabituationof
Neuron6,71–82.
thegill-withdrawalreflexinAplysia.Science167,1745–1748.
Dudai,Y.,Jan,Y.N.,Byers,D.,Quinn,W.G.,andBenzer,S.(1976).
Castellucci,V.F.,Carew,T.J.,andKandel,E.R.(1978).Cellularanaly-
dunce,amutantofDrosophilamelanogasterdeficientinlearning.
sisoflong-termhabituationofthegill-withdrawalreflexofAplysia
Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA73,1684–1688.
californica.Science202,1306–1308.
Dudai,Y.,Uzzan,A.,andZvi,S.(1983).Abnormalactivityofadenyl-
Castellucci,V.F.,Kandel,E.R.,Schwartz,J.H.,Wilson,F.D.,Nairn,
atecyclaseintheDrosophilamemorymutantrutabaga.Neurosci.
A.C.,andGreengard,P.(1980).Intracellularinjectionofthecatalytic
Lett.42,207–212.
subunitofcyclicAMP–dependentproteinkinasesimulatesfacilita-
tion of transmitter release underlying behavioral sensitization in Eichenbaum,H.(1997).Declarativememory:insightsfromcognitive
Aplysia.Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA77,7492–7496. neurobiology.Annu.Rev.Psychol.48,547–572.
Castellucci,V.F.,Nairn,A.,Greengard,P.,Schwartz,J.H.,andKan- Fanselow,M.S.,andKim,J.J.(1994).AcquisitionofcontextualPav-
del, E.R. (1982). Inhibitor of adenosine 3(cid:57),5(cid:57)-monophosphate– lovianfearconditioningisblockedbytheapplicationofNMDAre-
dependentproteinkinaseblockspresynapticfacilitationinAplysia. ceptorantagonistDL-2aminovalericacidtothebasolateralamyg-
J.Neurosci.2,1673–1681. dala.Behav.Neurosci.108,210–212.
Chapman,P.E., Kairiss,E.,Keenan,C.L., andBrown, T.H.(1990). Feany,J.B.,andQuinn,W.G.(1995).Aneuropeptidegenedefined
Long-termpotentiationintheamygdala.Synapse6,271–278. bytheDrosophilamemorymutantamnesiac.Science268,869–873.
Chen,C.-N.,Denome,S.,andDavis,R.L.(1986).Molecularanalysis Frey,U., Huang, Y.-Y.,and Kandel,E.R. (1993).Effects ofcAMP
ofcDNAclonesandthecorrespondinggenomiccodingsequences simulatealatestageofLTPinhippocampalCA1neurons.Science
oftheDrosophiladunce(cid:49)gene,thestructuralgeneforcAMPphos- 260,1661–1664.
phodiesterase.Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA83,9313–9317. Frost,W.N.,Castellucci,V.F.,Hawkins,R.D.,andKandel,E.R.(1985).

Neuron
466
Monosynapticconnectionsmadebythesensoryneuronsofthegill- oftheeffectsofmutationsinPKAonmossyfiberLTPanditsrelation
andsiphon-withdrawalreflexinAplysiaparticipate inthestorage tospatialandcontextuallearning.Cell83,1211–1222.
oflong-termmemoryforsensitization.Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA Kaang,B.-K.,Kandel,E.R.,andGrant,S.G.N.(1993).Activationof
82,8266–8269. cAMP-responsivegenesbystimulithatproducelong-termfacilita-
Frost,W.N.,Clark,G.A.,andKandel,E.R.(1988).Parallelprocessing tioninAplysiasensoryneurons.Neuron10,427–435.
ofshort-termmemoryforsensitizationinAplysia.J.Neurobiol.19, Kandel,E.R.(1976).CellularBasisofBehavior.(SanFrancisco:W.H.
297–334. FreemanandCompany).
Geinisman,Y.,deToledo-Morell,L.,andMadell,F.(1991).Induction Kandel,E.R.,andTauc,L.(1964).Mechanismofprolongedheterosy-
oflongtermpotentiationisassociatedwithanincreaseinthenum- napticfacilitation.Nature202,145.
berofaxospinoussynapseswithsegmentedpostsynapticdensities. Kandel,E.R.,andSpencer,W.A.(1968).Cellularneurophysiological
BrainRes.566,77–88. approachesinthestudyoflearning.Physiol.Rev.48,65–134.
Gelperin, A. (1975). Rapid food-aversion learning by a terrestrial Kandel,E.R.,andSchwartz,J.H.(1982).Molecularbiologyoflearn-
mollusk.Science189,567–570. ing:modulationoftransmitterrelease.Science218,433–443.
Gilbert,C.D.(1998).Adultcorticaldynamics.Physiol.Rev.,inpress. Katz,P.S.,andFrost,W.N.(1995).Intrinsicneuromodulationinthe
Glanzman, D.L., Mackey,S.L., Hawkins, R.D., Dyke,A.M., Lloyd, TritoniaswimCPG:serotoninmediatesbothneuromodulationand
P.E.,andKandel,E.R.(1989).Depletionofserotonininthenervous neurotransmissionbythedorsalswiminterneurons.J.Neurophys-
systemofAplysiareducesthebehavioralenhancementofgillwith- iol.74,2281–2294.
drawalas wellas theheterosynapticfacilitationproducedby tail Kim,J.J.,andFanselow,M.S.(1992).Modality-specificretrograde
shock.J.Neurosci.9,4200–4213. amnesiaoffear.Science256,675–677.
Goda,Y.,andStevens,C.F.(1996).Synapticplasticity:thebasisof Kim,J.J.,Clark,R.E.,andThompson,R.F.(1995).Hippocampectomy
particulartypesoflearning.Curr.Biol.6,375–378. impairsthememoryofrecently,butnot remotely,acquired trace
Goelet,P.,Castellucci,V.F.,Schacher,S.,andKandel,E.R.(1986). eyeblinkconditionedresponses.Behav.Neurosci.109,195–203.
Thelongandshortoflong-termmemory—amolecularframework. Knowlton,B.J.,Mangels,J.A.,andSquire,L.R.(1996).Aneostriatal
Nature322,419–422. habitlearningsysteminhumans.Science273,1399–1402.
Gollin,E.S.(1960).Developmentalstudiesofvisual recognitionof Konorski,J.(1959).Anewmethodofphysiologicalinvestigationof
incompleteobjects.Percept.MotorSkills11,289–298. recentmemoryinanimals.Bull.Acad.Pol.Sci.[Biol.]7,115–117.
Goodwin, S.F., DelVecchio, M., Velinzon, K., Hogel, C., Russell, Krasne,F.B.(1969).Excitationandhabituationofthecrayfishescape
S.R.H.,Tully,T.,andKaiser,K.(1997).Defectivelearninginmutants reflex:thedepolarizationresponseinlateralgiantfibersoftheiso-
oftheDrosophilageneforaregulatorysubunitofcAMP-dependent latedabdomen.J.Exp.Biol.50,29–46.
proteinkinase.J.Neurosci.17,8817–8827. Kullman,D.M.,andSiegelbaum,S.A.(1995).Thesiteofexpression
Grant, S.G., O’Dell, T.J., Karl, K.A., Stein, P.L., Soriano, P., and ofNMDAreceptor–dependentlong-termpotentiation:newfuelfor
Kandel,E.R.(1992).Impairedlong-termpotentiation,spatiallearn- anoldfire.Neuron15997–1002.
ing,andhippocampaldevelopmentinfynmutantmice.Science258, Kupfermann, I., and Kandel, E.R. (1969). Neuronal controls of a
1903–1910. behavioralresponsemediatedbytheabdominalganglionofAplysia.
Greenough,W.T.,andBailey,C.H.(1988).Theanatomyofmemory: Science164,847–850.
convergenceofresultsacrossadiversityoftests.TrendsNeurosci. Lashley,K.S.(1929).BrainMechanismsandIntelligence:aQuantita-
11,142–47. tive Study of Injuries to the Brain (Chicago: Chicago University
Greenough,W.T.,Swain,R.A.,Kleim, J.A.,andWeiler,I.J.(1996). Press).
Are experience-inducedmorphologicalchangesreflectedinbrain LeDoux,J.E.(1995).Emotion:cluesfromthebrain.Annu.Rev.Psy-
physiology?InUeharaMemorialFoundationSymposiumon“Integ- chol.46,209–264.
rative andMolecular Approach to Brain Function,”M.Ito andY.
LeDoux,J.E.(1996).TheEmotionalBrain:theMysteriousUnderpin-
Miyashita,eds.(Amsterdam:elsevier),pp.29–34.
ningsofEmotionalLife(NewYork:SimonandSchuster).
Hawkins, R.D., andKandel, E.R. (1984).Isthere acell biological
Levin,L.R., Han, P.-L., Hwang, P.M., Feinstein,P.G., Davis, R.L,
alphabetforsimpleformsoflearning?Psychol.Rev.91,375–391.
andReed,R.R.(1992).TheDrosophilalearningandmemorygene
Hawkins,R.D.,Castellucci,V.F.,andKandel,E.R.(1981a).Interneu- rutabagaencodesaCa2(cid:49)/calmodulin–responsiveadenylylcyclase.
rons involved inmediation and modulationof thegill-withdrawal Cell68,479–489.
reflexinAplysia.I.Identificationandcharacterization.J.Neurophys- Li,W., Tully,T.,andKalderon, D. (1996). Effectsof aconditional
iol.45,304–314.
DrosophilaPKAmutantonlearning andmemory.Learn.Mem.2,
Hawkins,R.D.,Castellucci,V.F.,andKandel,E.R.(1981b).Interneu- 320–333.
rons involved inmediation and modulationof thegill-withdrawal Lieb,J.R., Jr.,and Frost,W.N. (1997).Realistic simulation ofthe
reflexinAplysia.II.Identifiedneuronsproduceheterosynapticfacili- Aplysiasiphon-withdrawalreflexcircuit:rolesofcircuitelementsin
tationcontributingtobehavioralsensitization.J.Neurophysiol.45, producingmotoroutput.J.Neurophysiol.77,1249–1268.
315–326.
Lin,X.Y., and Glanzman,D.L. (1994). Hebbian induction of long-
Hawkins,R.D.,Abrams,T.W.,Carew,T.J.,andKandel,E.R.(1983). termpotentiationofAplysiasensorimotorsynapses:partialrequire-
AcellularmechanismofclassicalconditioninginAplysia:activity- mentforactivationofNMDA-relatedreceptor.Proc.R.Soc.Lond.
dependent amplification of presynaptic facilitation. Science 219, [Biol.]255,215–221.
400–405.
Livingstone, M.S.,Sziber, P.P., and Quinn, W.G. (1984). Loss of
Hebb,D.O.(1949).TheOrganizationofBehavior:aNeuropsycholog- calcium/calmodulin responsivenessin adenylate cyclase of ruta-
icalTheory(NewYork:Wiley). baga,aDrosophilalearningmutant.Cell137,205–215.
Hegde,A.N.,Inokuchi,K.,Pei,W.,Casadio,A.,Ghirardi,M.,Chain, Malenka, R.C., Kauer, J.A., Perkel, D.J.,Mauk, M.D., Kelly,P.T.,
D.G.,Martin,K.C.,Kandel,E.R.,andSchwartz,J.H.(1997).Ubiquitin Nicoll,R.A.,andWaxham,M.N.(1989).Anessentialroleforpostsyn-
C-terminalhydrolaseisanimmediate-earlygeneessentialforlong- apticcalmodulinandproteinkinaseactivityinlong-termpotentia-
termfacilitationinAplysia.Cell89,115–126. tion.Nature340,554–557.
Huang,Y.-Y.,Li,X.-C.,andKandel,E.R.(1994).cAMPcontributes Malinow,R.,Madison,D.V.,andTsien,R.W.(1988).Persistentpro-
to mossyfiberLTPby initiatingbothacovalentlymediatedearly teinkinaseactivityunderlyinglongtermpotentiation.Nature325,
phase andmacromolecular synthesis-dependentlate phase.Cell 820–824.
79,69–79. Maren, S., and Fanselow, M.S. (1995). Synaptic plasticity in the
Huang,Y.-Y.,Kandel,E.R.,Varshavsky,L.,Brandon,E.P.,Idzerda, basolateralamygdalainducedbyhippocampalformationstimula-
R.L.,McKnight,G.S.,andBourtchouladze,R.(1995).Agenetictest tion.J.Neurosci.15,7548–7564.

Review:Milner,Squire,andKandel
467
Martin,K.C.,Michael,D.,Rose,J.C.,Barad,M.,Casadio,A.,Zhu,H., O’Dell,T.J.,Kandel,E.R.,andGrant,S.G.N.(1990).Long-termpoten-
andKandel,E.R.(1997).MAPkinasetranslocatesintothenucleusof tiationinthehippocampusisblockedbytyrosinekinaseinhibitors.
the presynaptic cell and is required for long-term facilitation in Nature353,558–560.
Aplysia.Neuron18,899–912. O’Keefe,J.,andDostrovsky,J.(1971).Thehippocampusasaspatial
Martin, K.C., and Kandel, E.R. (1996). Cell adhesion molecules, map. Preliminary evidencefromunit activity inthe freelymoving
CREB,andtheformationofnewsynapticconnections.Neuron17, rat.BrainRes.34,171–175.
567–570. Packard,M.G.,Hirsh,R.,andWhite,N.M.(1989).Differentialeffects
Mayford,M.,Bach,M.E.,Huang,Y.-Y.,Wang,L.,Hawkins,R.D.,and of fornix andcaudatenucleuslesions ontwo radialmaze tasks:
Kandel,E.R.(1996).Controlofmemoryformationthroughregulated evidenceformultiplememorysystems.J.Neurosci.9,1465–1472.
expressionofCaMKII(cid:97)transgene.Science274,1678–1683.
Penfield, W., and Milner, B. (1958). Memory deficits induced by
McClelland,J.L.,McNaughton,B.L.,andO’Reilly,R.C.(1995).Why bilaterallesionsinthehippocampalzone.Am.Med.Assoc.Arch.
therearecomplementarylearningsystemsinthehippocampusand Neurol.Psychiatry79,475–497.
neocortex:insightsfromthesuccessesandfailuresofconnectionist Penfield,W.,andMathieson,G.(1974).Memory:autopsyfindings
modelsoflearningandmemory.Psychol.Rev.102,419–457. andcommentsontheroleofthehippocampusinexperientialrecall.
McCormick,D.A.,andThompson,R.F.(1984).Cerebellum:essential Arch.Neurol.31,145–154.
involvementintheclassicallyconditionedeyelidrepsonse.Science Quinn,W.G.,Harris,W.A.,andBenzer,S.(1974).Conditionedbehav-
223,296–299. ior in Drosophila melanogaster. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 71,
McGaugh,J.L.,Cahill,L.,andRoozendaal,B.(1996).Involvement 708–712.
of theamygdala inmemory storage: interactionwith other brain Quinn, W.G.,Sziber, P.P.,andBooker,R. (1979). The Drosophila
systems.Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA93,13508–13514. memorymutantamnesiac.Nature277,212–214.
McHugh, T.J.,Blum, K.I.,Tsien, J.Z., Tonegawa, S., andWilson, Rankin,C.H.(1991).Interactionsbetweentwoantagonisticreflexes
M.A.(1996).ImpairedhippocampalrepresentationofspaceinCA1- in thenematode Caenorhabditis elegans. J.Comp. Physiol. 169,
specificNMDAR1knockoutmice.Cell87,1339–1349. 59–67.
McKernan,M.G.,andShinnick-Gallagher,P.(1997).Fearcondition- Rempel-Clower, N.L., Zola,S.M., Squire, L.R., and Amaral, D.G.
inginducesalastingpotentiationofsynapticcurrentsinvivo.Nature (1996).Threecasesofenduringmemoryimpairmentfollowingbilat-
390,607–611. eraldamagelimitedtothehippocampalformation.J.Neurosci.16,
Menzel,R.,andErber,J.(1978).Learningandmemoryinbees.Sci. 5233–5255.
Am.239,102–110. Rogan,M.T.,andLeDoux,J.E.(1995).LTPisaccompaniedbycom-
Merzenich,M.M.,andSameshima,K.(1993).Corticalplasticityand mensurate enhancement of auditory-evoked responses in a fear
memory.Curr.Opin.Neurobiol.3,187–196. conditioningcircuit.Neuron15,127–136.
Milner, B. (1962).Les troublesde lame´moire accompagnantles Rogan,M.T.,Staubilk,U.V.,andLeDoux,J.E.(1997).Fearcondition-
le´sions hippocampiques bilate´rales. In Physiologie de l’Hippo- inginducesassociativelong-termpotentiationintheamygdala.Na-
campe,ColloquesInternationauxNo.107(Paris,C.N.R.S.),pp.257– ture390,604–607.
272. [English translation (1965). In Cognitive Processes and the Rotenberg,A.,Mayford,M.,Hawkins,R.D.,Kandel,E.R.,andMuller,
Brain,P.M.MilnerandS.Glickman,eds.(Princeton,NJ:VanNos- R.U.(1996).MiceexpressingactivatedCaMKIIlacklowfrequency
trand),pp.97–111.] LTP anddo not formstableplacecellsin theCA1regionof the
Milner,B.(1965).Visuallyguidedmazelearninginman:effectsof hippocampus.Cell87,1351–1361.
bilateralhippocampal, bilateralfrontal, andunilateral cerebralle- Schacher, S., Castellucci, V.F., and Kandel, E.R. (1988). CAMP
sions.Neuropsychologia3,317–338. evokes long-term facilitationin Aplysia sensory neurons thatre-
Milner,B.(1972).Disordersoflearningandmemoryaftertemporal- quiresnewproteinsynthesis.Science240,1667–1669.
lobelesionsinman.Clin.Neurosurg.19,421–446. Schacter,D.L.,andTulving,E.(1994).Whatarethememorysystems
Milner,B.,andPenfield,W.(1955).Theeffectofhippocampallesions of1994? InMemorySystems1994,D.L. SchacterandE.Tulving,
onrecentmemory.Trans.Am.Neurol.Assoc.80,42–48. eds.(Cambridge,MA:theMITPress)pp.1–38.
Milner, B., andTaylor, L. (1972). Righthemisphere superiorityin Schwartzkroin,P.A.,andWester,K.(1975).Long-lastingfacilitation
tactilepatternrecognitionaftercerebralcommissurotomy:evidence ofasynapticpotentialfollowingtetanizationintheinvitrohippocam-
fornonverbalmemory.Neuropsychologia10,1–15. palslice.BrainRes.89,107–119.
Milner,B.,Corkin,S.,andTeuber,H.-L.(1968).Furtheranalysisof Scoville, W.B. (1954). The limbic lobe in man. J. Neurosurg. 11,
thehippocampalamnesicsyndrome.Neuropsychologia6,215–234. 64–66.
Miserendino,J.J.D.,Sananes,C.B.,Melia,K.R.,andDavis,M.(1990). Scoville, W.B.,andMilner,B.(1957).Lossofrecentmemoryafter
Blocking of acquisition but not expression of conditioned fear- bilateralhippocampallesions.J.Neurol.Neurosurg.Psychiatry20,
potentiatedstartlebyNMDAantagonistsintheamygdala.Nature 11–21.
345,716–718. Sidman,M.,Stoddard,L.T.,andMohr,J.P.(1968).Someadditional
Mishkin,M.(1978).Memoryinmonkeysseverelyimpairedbycom- quantitative observationsof immediatememory ina patientwith
binedbutnotbyseparateremovalofamygdalaandhippocampus. bilateralhippocampallesions.Neuropsychologia6,245–254.
Nature273,297–298. Silva, A.J., Paylor, R., Wehner, J.M., and Tonegawa, S. (1992a).
Montarolo,P.,Schacher,S., Castellucci,V.F.,Hawkins,R.D.,Ab- Impairedspatiallearninginalpha-calcium-calmodulinkinaseIImu-
rams,T.W.,Goelet,P.,andKandel,E.R.(1986).Interrelationships tantmice.Science257,206–211.
ofcellularmechanismsfordifferentformsoflearningandmemory. Silva,A.J.,Stevens,C.F.,Tonegawa,S.,andWang,Y.(1992b).Defi-
InMolecularAspectsofNeurobiology,R.LeviMontalcini,P.Calis- cienthippocampallong-termpotentiationinalpha-calcium-calmod-
sano,ER.Kandel,andA.Maggi,eds.(Berlin:Springer-Verlag),pp. ulinkinaseIImutantmice.Science257,201–206.
1–14. Skoulakis,E.M.C.,Kalderon,D.,andDavis,R.L.(1993).Preferential
Morris,R.G.,Garrud,P.,Rawlins,J.N.,andO’Keefe,J.(1982).Place expressioninmushroombodiesofthecatalyticsubunitofprotein
navigationimpairedinratswithhippocampallesions.Nature297, kinaseAanditsroleinlearningandmemory.Neuron11,197–208.
681–683. Spencer,W.A.,Thompson,R.F.,andNielson,D.R.,Jr.(1966).Decre-
Murphy, G.G., and Glanzman, D.L. (1997). Mediation of classical mentofventralrootelectrotonusandintracellularlyrecordedPSPs
conditioninginAplysiacalifornicabylong-termpotentiationofsen- producedbyiteratedcutaneousafferentvolleys.J.Neurophysiol.
sorimotorsynapses.Science278,467–470. 29,253–273.
Nestler,E.J., and Aghajanian,G.K. (1997). Molecularandcellular Squire,L.R.(1992).Memoryandthehippocampus:asynthesisfrom
basisofaddiction.Science278,58–63. findingswithrats,monkeys,andhumans.Psychol.Rev.99,195–231.

Neuron
468
Squire,L.R.,andZola-Morgan,S.(1991).Themedialtemporallobe
memorysystem.Science253,1380–1386.
Squire,L.R.,andAlvarez,P.(1995).Retrogradeamnesiaandmem-
oryconsolidation:aneurobiologicalperspective.Curr.Opin.Neuro-
biol.5,169–177.
Squire,L.R.,andZola-Morgan,S.(1996).Structureandfunctionof
declarativeandnondeclarativememorysystems.Proc.Natl.Acad.
Sci.USA93,13515–13522.
Squire,L.R.,Haist,F.,andShimamura,A.P.(1989).Theneurology
ofmemory:quantitativeassessmentofretrogradeamnesiaintwo
groupsofamnesicpatients.J.Neurosci.9,828–839.
Squire,L.R.,Knowlton,B.,andMusen,G.(1993).Thestructureand
organizationofmemory.Annu.Rev.Psychol.44,453–495.
Stepien,L.,andSierpinski,S.(1960).Theeffectoffocallesionsof
thebrainuponauditoryandvisualrecentmemoryinman.J.Neurol.
Neurosurg.Psychiatry23,334–340.
Thompson, R.F.,andSpencer, W.A.(1966).Habituation:a model
phenomenonforthestudyofneuronalsubstratesofbehavior.Psy-
chol.Rev.173,16–43.
Thompson, R.F.,andKrupa,D.J.(1994). Organizationof memory
tracesinthemammalianbrain.Annu.Rev.Neurosci.17,519–550.
Tsien,J.Z.,Chen,D.F.,Gerber,D.,Tom,C.,Mercer,E.H.,Anderson,
D.J.,Mayford,M.,Kandel,E.R.,andTonegawa,S.(1996a).Subre-
gion-andcelltype-restrictedgeneknockout inmousebrain.Cell
87,1317–1326.
Tsien,J.Z.,Huerta,P.T.,andTonegawa,S.(1996b).Theessential
roleofhippocampalCA1NMDAreceptor–dependentsynapticplas-
ticityinspatialmemory.Cell87,1327–1338.
Tully,T.,Preat,T.,Boynton,S.C.,andDelVecchio,M.(1994).Genetic
dissectionofconsolidatedmemoryinDrosophilamelanogaster.Cell
79,35–47.
Tully,T., Bolwig,G.,Christensen,J.,Connolly,J.,DelVecchio,M.,
DeZazzo,J.,Dubnau,J.,Jones,G.,Pinto,S.,andRegulski,M.,et
al.(1996).AreturntogeneticdissectionofmemoryinDrosophila.
ColdSpringHarborSymp.Quant.Biol.61,207–218.
Tulving,E.,andSchacter,D.L.(1990).Primingandhumanmemory
systems.Science247,301–306.
Warrington,E.,andWeiskrantz,L. (1968).Newmethodoftesting
long-termretentionwithspecialreferencetoamnesicpatients.Na-
ture217,972–974.
Weiskrantz,L. (1990). Somecontributions of neuropsychologyof
visionandmemorytotheproblemofconsciousness.InConscious-
ness andContemporary Science,A.Marcel and E. Bisiach,eds.
(NewYork:OxfordUniversityPress),pp.183–197.
Wiig,K.A.,Cooper,L.N.,andBear,M.F.(1996).Temporallygraded
retrogradeamnesiafollowingseparateandcombinedlesionsofthe
perirhinalcortexandfornixintherat.Learn.Mem.3,305–312.
Winocur,G.(1990).Anterogradeandretrogradeamnesiainratswith
dorsalhippocampalordorsomedialthalamiclesions.Behav.Brain
Res.38,145.
Yin,J.C.P.,Wallach, J.S.,DelVecchio,M.,Wilder, E.L.,Zhuo,H.,
Quinn,W.G.,andTully,T.(1994).Inductionofadominant-negative
CREBtransgenespecificallyblockslong-termmemoryinDrosoph-
ila.Cell79,49–58.
Yin,J.C.P.,DelVecchio,M.,Zhou,H.,andTully,T.(1995). CREB
asamemorymodulator:inducedexpressionofadCREB2activa-
tor isoform enhances long-term memory in Drosophila. Cell 81,
107–115.
Zola-Morgan,S.,andSquire,L.R.(1990).Theprimatehippocampal
formation:evidenceforatime-limitedroleinmemorystorage.Sci-
ence250,288–290.
Zola-Morgan,S.,Squire,L.R.,andAmaral,D.G.(1986).Humanam-
nesiaandthemedialtemporalregion:enduringmemoryimpairment
followingabilaterallesionlimitedtofieldCA1ofthehippocampus.
J.Neurosci.6,2950–2967.
Zucker, R.S., Kennedy, D., and Selverston, A.I. (1971). Neuronal
circuit mediating escape responses in crayfish. Science 173,
645–650.



i An update to this article is included at the end
Neuron
Perspective
Rethinking the Emotional Brain
JosephLeDoux1,2,*
1CenterforNeuralScienceandDepartmentofPsychology,NewYorkUniversity,NewYork,NY10003USA
2EmotionalBrainInstitute,NewYorkUniversityandNathanKlineInstitute,Orangeburg,NY10962USA
*Correspondence:jel1@nyu.edu
DOI10.1016/j.neuron.2012.02.004
Iproposeareconceptualizationofkeyphenomenaimportantinthestudyofemotion—thosephenomenathat
reflect functions and circuits related to survival, and that are shared by humans and other animals. The
approach shifts the focus from questions about whether emotions that humans consciously feel are also
presentinotheranimals,andtowardquestionsabouttheextenttowhichcircuitsandcorrespondingfunc-
tionsthatarepresentinotheranimals(survivalcircuitsandfunctions)arealsopresentinhumans.Survival
circuitfunctionsarenotcausallyrelatedtoemotionalfeelingsbutobviouslycontributetothese,atleastindi-
rectly.Thesurvivalcircuitconceptintegratesideasaboutemotion,motivation,reinforcement,andarousalin
the effort to understand how organisms survive and thrive by detecting and responding to challenges and
opportunitiesindailylife.
Introduction emotion is, and how emotion differs from other psychological
Emotion is a major research growth area in neuroscience and states, how can we study emotion in animals or humans, and
psychologytoday.AsearchofPubMedcitationsforthe1960s howcanwemakecomparisonsbetweenspecies?
yieldsjustover100paperswiththeword‘‘emotion’’inthetitle. The short answer is that we fake it. Introspections from
With each subsequent decade, small increases resulted, until personalsubjectiveexperiencestellusthatsomementalstates
thelastdecade,whenemotiontitlesgrewexponentially—more haveacertain‘‘feeling’’associatedwiththemandothersdonot.
than2,000hits.Emotionhashappened. Those states that humans associate with feelings are often
But what exactly is it that has happened? What is being called emotions. The terms ‘‘emotion’’ and ‘‘feeling’’ are, in
studied in all these papers on emotion? Actually, the term fact,oftenusedinterchangeably.InEnglishwehavewordslike
‘‘emotion’’ is not well defined in most publications. Perhaps fear,anger,love,sadness,jealousy,andsoon,forthesefeeling
thisisnotsurprisingsincethereislittleconsensusaboutwhat states,andwhenscientistsstudyemotionsinhumanstheytypi-
emotion is, and how it differs from other aspects of mind and cally use these ‘‘feeling words’’ as guideposts to explore the
behavior,inspiteofdiscussionanddebatethatdatesbackto terrainofemotion.
theearliestdaysinmodernbiologyandpsychology(e.g.,Dar- The wisdom of using common language words that refer to
win, 1872; James, 1884; Cannon, 1927, 1931; Duffy, 1934, feelings as a means of classifying and studying human
1941;Tomkins,1962;Mandler,1975;Schachter,1975;Ekman, emotions has been questioned by a number of authors over
1980,1984,1992;Izard,2007;Frijda,1986;Russell,2003;;Ek- the years (e.g., Duffy, 1934, 1941; Mandler, 1975; Russell,
man and Davidson, 1994; LeDoux, 1996; Panksepp, 1998, 1991, 2003; Barrett, 2006a, 2006b; Kagan, 2007; Griffiths,
2000,2005;Rolls,1999,2005;Damasio,1994,1999;Leventhal 1997;Rorty,1980;Dixon,2001;Zachar,2006).Whateverprob-
andScherer,1987;Scherer,2000;OrtonyandTurner,1990;O¨h- lems might arise from using feeling words to study human
man, 1986, 2009; Johnson-Laird and Oatley, 1989; Ellsworth, emotion, the complications are compounded many fold when
1994; Zajonc, 1980; Lazarus, 1981, 1991a, 1991b; Barrett, such words are applied to other animals. While there are
2006a, 2006b; Barrett et al., 2007; Kagan, 2007; Prinz, 2004; certainly emotional phenomena that are shared by humans
Scarantino, 2009; Griffiths, 2004; Ochsner and Gross, 2005; andotheranimals,introspectionsfromhumansubjectiveexpe-
Lyons,1980). rience are not the best starting point for pursuing these. How,
Onepointthatmanywritersonthistopicacceptisthat,while then,shouldtheaspectsofemotionrelevanttoanimalsandhu-
there are unique features of human emotion, at least some mansalikebepursued?
aspects of human emotion reflect our ancestral past. This In answering this question it is important to separate the
conclusion is the basis of neurobiological approaches to phenomenaofinterestfromtheoverarchingconceptofemotion.
emotion, since animal research is essential for identifying Onesetofsuchphenomenaincludesresponsesthatoccurwhen
specific circuits and mechanisms in the brain that underlie an organism detects and responds to significant events in the
emotionalphenomena. courseofsurvivingand/ormaintainingwell-being—forexample,
Progressinunderstandingemotionalphenomenainthebrains responsesthatoccurwhenindangerorwheninthepresenceof
of laboratory animals has in fact helped elucidate emotional apotentialmateorinthepresenceoffoodwhenhungryordrink
functionsinthehumanbrain,includingpathologicalaspectsof when thirsty. These are fundamental phenomena that have
emotion. But what does this really mean? If we don’t have an always interested animal behavior scientists, and would be of
agreed-upon definition of emotion that allows us to say what interest even if the terms ‘‘emotion’’ and ‘‘feelings’’ never
Neuron73,February23,2012ª2012ElsevierInc. 653

Neuron
Perspective
existed.Thechallengeforemotionresearchersistounderstand mides,1990;Pinker,1997;Nesse,1990).Ifmanyresearchersin
therelationofthephenomenatothefieldofemotionwithoutre- thefield(pastandpresent)believethis,whydoweneedtobother
definingthemasfundamentallyemotionalphenomena,andthus withanotherdiscussionofthetopic?
infusingthephenomenawithconfusingimplications. Amajorcontroversyinthefieldofemotionresearchtodayis,in
InthisPerspectiveI,therefore,describeawayofconceiving fact,abouttheissueofwhetherthereareinnateemotioncircuits
phenomenaimportanttothestudyofemotion,butwithminimal inthehumanbrain.Thisdebateiscenteredonthequestionof
recoursetothetermsemotionorfeelings.Thefocusisinsteadon whetheremotionsare‘‘naturalkinds,’’thingsthatexistinnature
circuitsthatinstantiatefunctionsthatalloworganismstosurvive as opposed to being inventions (constructions) of the human
andthrivebydetectingandrespondingtochallengesandoppor- mind (e.g., Panksepp, 2000; Griffiths, 2004; Barrett, 2006a;
tunities.Included,ataminimum,arecircuitsinvolvedindefense, Izard, 2007; Scarantino, 2009). Much of the discussion is
maintenance of energy and nutritional supplies, fluid balance, focused the question of whether so-called ‘‘basic emotions’’
thermoregulation,andreproduction.Thesesurvivalcircuitsand arenaturalkinds.Basicemotionsarethosethataresaidtobe
their adaptive functions are conserved to a significant degree universally expressed and recognized in people around the
in across mammalian species, including humans. While there world,conservedinourcloseanimalancestors,andsupposedly
arespecies-specific aspectsofthesefunctions, therearealso hard-wiredintobraincircuitsbyevolution(Darwin,1872;Tom-
core components of these functions that are shared by all kins,1962;Ekman,1972,1980,1984,1992,1999a,1999b;Izard,
mammals. 1992,2007;Damasio,1994,1999;Panksepp,1998,2000,2005;
By focusing on survival functions instantiated in conserved Prinz,2004).Contemporarytheoriesrecognizebetweenfiveand
circuits,keyphenomenarelevanttoemotionsandfeelingsare seven of these basic or primary emotions. Ekman’s list of six
discussed with the natural direction of brain evolution in mind basic emotions is the canonical example (Ekman, 1972) and
(by asking to what extent are functions and circuits that are includesfear,anger,happiness,sadness,disgust,andsurprise.
presentinothermammalsalsopresentinhumans)ratherthan Thislistofputativehard-wiredbasicemotionsinfactservesas
by looking backward, and anthropomorphically, into evolu- the foundation for much research on the neural basis of
tionary history (by asking whether human emotions/feelings emotionalfunctionsinthehumanbrain—arecentreviewuncov-
havecounterpartsinotheranimals). ered 551 studies between 1990 and 2008 that used Ekman’s
Emotion, motivation, reinforcement, and arousal are closely basic emotions faces or variants of these to study functional
related topics and often appear together in proposals about activity related to emotion in the human brain (see Fusar-Poli
emotion. Focusing on survival functions and circuits allows etal.,2009).
phenomenarelatedtoemotion,motivation,reinforcement,and Inspiteofbeingwellknownandwidelyappliedinresearch,the
arousaltobetreatedascomponentsofaunifiedprocessthat basic emotions point of view has been challenged on various
unfoldswhenanorganismfacesachallengeoropportunity. grounds (e.g., Averill, 1980; Ortony and Turner, 1990; Russell,
What follows is not an attempt at explaining or defining 1980,2003;Barrett,2006a;Barrettetal.,2007).Foronething,
emotion. Instead, the aim is to offer a framework for thinking different theories have different numbers of basic emotions,
about some key phenomena associated with emotion andevendifferentnamesforsimilaremotions.Inaddition,ques-
(phenomena related to survival functions) in a way that is tionshavebeenraisedaboutthemethodsusedtoidentifybasic
notconfoundedbyconfusionoverwhatemotionmeans.Step- emotions (e.g., forced choice rather than free labeling of the
ping back from the overarching concept of emotion and emotion expressed in a face). Basic emotions theory has also
focusing instead on key phenomena that make emotion an been challenged on the basis of a lack of coherence of the
interesting topic may be the best way out of the conceptual phenomenathatconstituteindividualemotions,andthediversity
stalemate that results from endless debates about what ofstatestowhichagivenemotionlabelcanrefer.Othersargue
emotion is. that emotions, even so-called basic emotions, are psycholog-
ical/social constructions, things created by the mind when
WhyDoWeNeedtoRethinktheRelationofEmotion people interact with the physical or social environment, as
toSurvival? opposedtobiologicallydeterminedstates.Alsorelevantisthe
The relation of innate survival functions to emotions is hardly factthatthemainbasicemotionstheorybasedonbrainresearch
novel,andgoesbackatleasttoDarwin(1872).Asaresult,neuro- in animals (Panksepp, 1998, 2005) lists emotions that do not
scientists have long assumed that specific emotional/motiva- matchupwellwiththoselisted byEkmanorothersashuman
tionalcircuitsareinnatelywiredintothebrainbyevolution,and basicemotions.
that these mediate functions that contribute to survival and Of particular relevance here is Barrett’s recent challenge to
well-being of the organism (e.g., Cannon, 1929; MacLean, the natural kinds status of basic emotions, and particularly to
1949,1952;Hess,1954;Stellar,1954;vonHolstandvonSaint- the idea that the human brain has evolutionarily conserved
Paul,1962;Flynn,1967;Olds,1977;SiegelandEdinger,1981; neural circuits for basic emotions (Barrett, 2006a; Barrett
Panksepp,1982,1998,2005;BlanchardandBlanchard,1972; et al., 2007). Her argument is centered on several points: that
Bolles and Fanselow, 1980; Damasio, 1994, 1999; Berridge, much of evidence in support of basic emotions in animals is
1999; McNaughton, 1989; Swanson, 2000; Ferris et al., 2008; based on older techniques that lack precision (electrical brain
Choi et al., 2005; Motta et al., 2009; Lin et al., 2011; O¨hman, stimulation), that basic emotions identified in animals do not
2009). That certain emotions are wired into the brain is also a mapontothehumancategories,andthatevidencefromhuman
major tenet of evolutionary psychology (e.g., Tooby and Cos- imaging studies show that similar brain areas are activated in
654 Neuron73,February23,2012ª2012ElsevierInc.

Neuron
Perspective
response to stimuli associated with different basic emotions. I served circuits do the heavy lifting. For example, there is no
disagreewithBarrett’sconclusionthatthesimilarityoffunctional anger/aggression circuit in the present scheme. This might at
activation in different emotions is an argument against basic first seem like a striking omission. However, it is important to
emotionssinceimagingdoesnothavetheresolutionnecessary note that aggression is not a unitary state with a single neural
to conclude that the similarity of activation in different states representation (Moyer, 1976; Chi and Flynn, 1971; Siegel and
meanssimilarneuralmechanisms.Yet,Iconcurwithherconclu- Edinger, 1981). Distinct forms of aggression (conspecific,
sion that the foundation of support for the idea that basic defensive,andpredatoryaggression)mightbemoreeffectively
emotions, as conventionallyconceived, have dedicated neural segregated by the context in which the aggression occurs:
circuitsisweak.Thisdoesnotmeanthatthemammalianbrain defensecircuitry(aggressioninanattempttoprotectone’sself
lacksinnatecircuitsthatmediatefundamentalphenomenarele- fromharm);reproductivecircuitry(aggressionrelatedtocompe-
vanttoemotion.Itsimplymeansthatemotions,asdefinedinthe titionformates);feedingcircuitry(predatoryaggressiontoward
contextof human basicemotions theory, maynotbethe best preyspecies).Similarly,ajoy/pleasure/happinesskindofcircuit
way to conceive of the relevant innate circuits. Enter survival isnotlistedandmightseemlikeafatalflaw.However,behaviors
circuits. usedtoindexjoy/pleasure/happinessareinsteadtreatedprod-
ucts of specific circuits involved in energy and nutrition, fluid
SurvivalCircuits balance,procreation,thermoregulation,etc.Byfocusingonthe
It has long been known that the body is a highly integrated subjective state, joy/pleasure/happiness, emotion theories
systemconsistingofmultiplesubsystemsthatworkinconcert tendtoglossovertheunderlyingdetailsofemotionalprocessing
tosustainlifebothonamomenttomomenttobasisandover for the sake of converging on a single word that symbolizes
longtimescales(Bernard,1878–1879;Cannon,1929;Lashley, diverseunderlyingstatesmediatedbydifferentkindsofcircuits.
1938; Morgan, 1943; Stellar, 1954; Selye, 1955; McEwen, Each survival circuit may itself need to be refined. For
2009;Damasio,1994,1999;Pfaff,1999;Schulkin,2003).Amajor example, it is unlikely that there is a single unified defense or
functionofthebrainistocoordinatetheactivityofthesevarious reproductive circuit. The range of functions studied needs to
body systems. An important category of life-sustaining brain be expanded to more effectively characterize these. Some
functionsarethosethatareachievedthroughbehavioralinterac- variationsondefensearedescribedbelow,butstillotherrefine-
tions with the environment. As noted, these survival circuits mentsmaybeneeded.
include,ataminimum,circuitsinvolvedindefense,maintenance Anotherkeydifferencebetweenthesurvivalcircuitandbasic
ofenergyandnutritionalsupplies,fluidbalance,thermoregula- emotionsapproachesisthis.Basicemotioncircuitsaremeant
tion,andreproduction. as an explanation of the feelings for which each circuit issaid
Survivalcircuitshavetheirultimateoriginsinprimordialmech- toberesponsible.Survivalcircuitsarenotpositedtohaveany
anismsthatwerepresentinearlylifeforms.Thisissuggestedby directrelation(causalrole)infeelings.Theyindirectlyinfluence
thefactthatextantsingle-cellorganisms,suchasbacteria,have feelings, as described later, but their function is to negotiate
the capacity to retract from harmful chemicals and to accept behavioral interactions in situations in which challenges and
chemicals that have nutritional value (Macnab and Koshland, opportunitiesexist,nottocreatefeelings.
1972).Withtheevolutionofmulticellular,andmultisystem,eu- Survival circuits help organisms survive and thrive by orga-
karyoticorganisms(Metazoa,orwhatweusuallycallanimals), nizing brain functions. When activated, specific kinds of
fundamental survival capacities increase in complexity and responsesriseinpriority,otheractivitiesareinhibited,thebrain
sophistication,inlargepartduetothepresenceofspecialized andbodyarearoused,attentionisfocusedonrelevantenviron-
sensory receptors and motor effectors, and a central nervous mentalandinternalstimuli,motivationalsystemsareengaged,
system that can coordinate bodily functions and interactions learning occurs, and memories are formed (e.g., Morgan,
withtheenvironment(Shepherd,1988). 1943;Hebb,1949;Bindra,1969;Gallistel,1980;Scherer,1984,
The brains of vertebrate organisms vary in size and 2000;MaturanaandVarela,1987;LeDoux,2002).
complexity. Yet, in spite of these differences, there is a highly Insum,survivalcircuitsaresensory-motorintegrativedevices
conservedorganizationalplanthatischaracteristicofallverte- thatservespecificadaptivepurposes.Theyaretunedtodetect
brate brains (Nauta and Karten, 1970; Northcutt and Kaas, information relevant to particular kinds of environmental chal-
1995; Swanson, 2002; Butler and Hodos, 2005; Striedter, lengesandopportunities,andtheyusethisinformationtocontrol
2005). This conservation is most often discussed in terms of behavioralresponsesandinternalphysiologicaladjustmentthat
central sensory and motor systems. However, sensory motor helpbringclosuretothesituation.Allcomplexanimals(inverte-
systemsdonotexistinisolation,andinfactevolvedtonegotiate bratesandvertebrates)havesurvivalcircuits.Corecomponents
interactionswiththeenvironmentforthepurposeofsustaining ofthesecircuitsarehighlyconservedinvertebrates.Ifocuson
life—for example, by maintaining energy and fluid supplies, vertebrates, especially mammals in this article, but consider
regulating body temperature, defending against harm, and the relation of invertebrate to vertebrate survival functions
enablingreproduction. towardtheend.
Thesurvivalcircuitslisteddonotalignwellwithhumanbasic
emotions. However, my goal is not to align survival circuits NatureandNurtureinSurvivalCircuits
with basic emotion categories. It is instead to break free from Survivalcircuitsdetectkeytriggerstimulionthebasisofinnate
basic emotion categories based on human emotional feelings programming or past experience. By innate programming I
(introspectively labeled subjective states) and instead let con- mean genetically specified synaptic arrangements that are
Neuron73,February23,2012ª2012ElsevierInc. 655

Neuron
Perspective
established in early development. Innate evaluative networks 2003;O¨hman,1986;MinekaandO¨hman,2002).Inspiteofbeing
make possible species-wide stimulus-response connections geneticallyspecified,innatestimulusprocessingisnevertheless
that allow organisms to respond to specific stimulus patterns subjecttoepigeneticmodulationbyvariousfactorsinsideand
in tried and true ways (i.e., with hard-wired/innate reactions) outside the organism during development, and throughout life
thathavebeenhonedbynaturalselection. (BendeskyandBargmann,2011;Monseyetal.,2011;McEwen
ByexperienceImeanconditionsunderwhichassociationsare etal,2012;BrownandHariri,2006;Caseyetal.,2011;Zhang
formedbetweennovelstimuliandbiologicallyinnatelysignificant etal.,2004).Indeed,someaspectsofdefensestimulusprocess-
events, typically innate triggers. These experience-dependent ing in primates, including humans, involves preferential rapid
associationsallowmeaninglessstimulithatoccurinconjunction learningtocertainclassesofinnately‘‘prepared’’stimuli(Selig-
withsignificanteventstoacquiretheabilitytoactivatetheinnate man, 1971; O¨hman, 1986; Mineka and O¨hman, 2002). Fearful
response patterns that are genetically wired to innate trigger and aggressive faces of conspecifics are also a potent innate
stimuli. The fact that the response patterns are innately wired defense trigger in humans and otherprimates (Adolphs, 2008;
and initially expressed involuntarily does not mean that they Davisetal.,2011).
arecompletelyinflexible.Notonlycantheybecoupledtonovel Recentstudieshaverevealedinsomedetailthecircuitsthat
stimulithroughexperienceandlearning,theycanberegulatedin allow rodents to respond to unconditioned threats, especially
terms of their time course and intensity, and perhaps in other odors that signal predators or potentially dangerous conspe-
ways. cifics(Dielenbergetal.,2001;Canteras,2002;Petrovichetal.,
Innateandexperience-basedevaluativemechanismsare,as 2001; Markham et al., 2004; Blanchard et al., 2003; Motta
noted,circuit-specific.Thus,defense,nutritional,reproductive, et al., 2009; Choi et al., 2005; Vyas et al., 2007; Pagani and
thermoregulatoryandothersurvivalsystemsarewiredtodetect Rosen,2009)(Figure1).Theodorsaredetectedbythevomero-
uniqueinnatetriggers.Byenteringintoassociationswithbiolog- nasalolfactorysystemandsenttothemedialamygdala(MEA),
ically significant stimuli, novel sensory eventsbecome learned which connects with the ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH).
triggers that activate survival circuits. We will consider innate Outputs of the latter reach the premammillary nucleus (PMH)
and learned survival circuit triggers in the context of defense ofthehypothalamus,whichconnectswithdorsalperiaqueductal
next. In the field of emotion, these are described as uncondi- gray(PAGd).Butnotall unconditioned threatsaresignaled by
tionedandconditionedfearstimuli. odors.Unconditionedthreatsprocessedbyother(nonolfactory)
modalitiesinvolvesensorytransmissiontothelateralamygdala
DefenseasanExample (LA) and from there to the accessory basal amygdala (ABA),
Theevidenceforconservationacrossmammalsofmechanisms whichconnectswiththeVMH-PM-PAGvcircuitry(Mottaetal.,
underlying survival functions such as defense (e.g., LeDoux, 2009). Different subnuclei of the MEA, PMH, and PAGd are
1996,2012;PhelpsandLeDoux,2005;Mottaetal.,2009;Choi involved in processing conspecific and predatory threats.
et al., 2005; Kalin et al.,2004; Amaral, 2003; Antoniadis et al., In the case of both olfactory and nonolfactory unconditioned
2007), reproduction (e.g., Pfaff, 1999; Oomura et al., 1988; threatsignals,thePAGdanditsoutputstomotorcontrolareas
Blaustein, 2008), thermoregulation (Nakamura and Morrison, directtheexpressionofbehavioralresponsesthathelppromote
2007), fluid balance (Johnson, 2007; Fitzsimons, 1979), and successfulresolutionofthethreateningevent.ThePAGisalso
energy/nutritional regulation (Elmquist et al., 2005; Morton involvedindetectionofinternalphysiologicalsignalsthattrigger
etal.,2006;Saperetal.,2002)isstrong.Spacedoesnotpermit defensivebehavior(Schimiteletal.,2012).
a detailed discussion of these circuits and their functions. Biologically insignificant stimuli acquire status as threat
Defensecircuitsinmammalswillbeusedasaninitialillustration. signalsresultswhentheyoccurinconjunctionwithbiologically
Defenseagainstharmisafundamentalrequirementoflife.As significantthreats.ThisiscalledPavloviandefenseconditioning,
notedabove,evensingle-cellorganismscandetectandrespond morecommonlyknownasfearconditioning.Thus,ameaning-
toharmfulenvironmentalstimuli.Incomplexorganisms(inverte- less conditioned stimulus (CS) acquires threat status after
bratesandvertebrates),threatdetectioninvolvesprocessingof occurring in conjunction with an aversive unconditioned stim-
innateandlearnedthreatsbythenervoussystemviatransmis- ulus (US). Most studies of Pavlovian defense conditioning
sion of information about the threat through sensory systems involve the use of electric shock as the biologically significant
tospecializeddefensecircuits. US,thoughothermodalitieshavebeenusedaswell.Typically,
Unconditioned threat stimuli are species-specific. The most auditory,visual,orolfactorystimuliastheinsignificantCS.While
common threat triggers are stimuli that signal other animals astrongUScaninducelearningtomostkindsofsensorystimuli,
(predatorsandpotentiallyharmfulconspecifics),andthesewill associabilityisnotcompletelypromiscuous—forexample,taste
obviouslybedifferentfordifferentspecies.Examplesofinnately stimuliassociatemorereadilywithgastricdiscomfortthanwith
wired stimuli for rodents include predator odors (e.g., Motta electric shock (Garcia et al., 1968). Once the association is
et al., 2009; Pagani and Rosen, 2009; Blanchard et al., 1990), formed, the CS itself has the ability to elicit innate defense
aswellashigh-frequencypredatorwarningsoundsemittedby responses.
conspecifics (e.g., Litvin et al., 2007; Choi and Brown, 2003), The neural circuit by which a CS (auditory, visual, olfactory)
high-intensity auditory stimuli (e.g., Bordi and LeDoux, 1992), elicits innate defense responses, such as freezing behavior,
and bright open spaces (Thompson and LeDoux, 1974; Gray, involves transmission of sensory inputs to the LA, intra-amyg-
1987;WalkerandDavis,2002).Inprimates,thesightofsnakes dala connections (direct and indirect) linking the LA with the
andspidershasaninnatepropensitytotriggerdefense(Amaral, central nucleus of the amygdala (CEA), and connections from
656 Neuron73,February23,2012ª2012ElsevierInc.

Neuron
Perspective
Figure1. CircuitsUnderlyingDefenseReactionsElicitedbyUnconditioned(Unlearned)andConditioned(Learned)Threats
Abbreviations:ABA,accessorybasalamygdala;BA,basalamygdala;CEA,centralamygdala;LA,lateralamygdala;LH,lateralhypothalamus;MEA,medial
amygdala;NAcc,nucleusaccumbens;VMH,ventromedialhypothalamus;PAGd,dorsalperiaqueductalgrayregion;PAGv,venralperiaqueductalgrayregion;
PMH,premammilarynucleusofthehypothalamus.
themedialCEA(CEm)totheventrolateralPAG(PAGvl)(Johan- Animportantgoalforfutureworkistoexaminetherelationof
sen et al., 2011; LeDoux, 2000; Maren, 2001; Fanselow and circuitsinvolvedininnateandlearnedbehavior.Electricshock
Poulos,2005;Davisetal.,1997;RosenkranzandGrace,2002; simulates tissue damage produced by predator-induced
Cousens and Otto, 1998; Pare´ et al., 2004; Maren and Quirk, wounds.However,itisdifficulttotracetheunconditionedstim-
2004; Quirk and Mueller, 2008; Haubensak et al., 2010). The ulus pathways with this kind of stimulus. Recent studies
indirect connections between LA and CEA include the basal exploring interactions between circuits processing olfactory
(BA), AB, and intercalated (ITC) nuclei (Pitka¨nen et al., 1997; conditionedandunconditionedstimuliisanimportantnewdirec-
Pare´ etal.,2004).Aswithunconditionedthreats,PAGoutputs tion(Pavesietal.,2011).
to motor control regions direct behavioral responses to the Another formof Pavlovian defenseconditioning involves the
threat.WhiledamagetothePAGvldisruptsdefensivefreezing association between a taste CS and a nausea-inducing US.
behavior,lesionsofthePAGdlenhancefreezing(DeOcaetal., The circuits underlying so called conditioned taste aversion
1998),suggestinginteractionsbetweentheseregions.Whether alsoinvolveregionsoftheamygdala,suchasCEAandthebaso-
the CEA and PAG might also be linked via the VMH or other loateralcomplex(whichincludestheLA,BA,andABAnuclei),as
hypothalamicnucleihasnotbeencarefullyexplored. well as areas of taste cortex (Lamprecht and Dudai, 2000).
While most studies have focused on freezing, this behavior However,theexactcontributionofamygdalaareastolearning
mainlyoccursinconfinedspaceswhereescapeisnotpossible andperformanceofthelearnedavoidanceresponseislessclear
(Fanselow, 1994; Blanchard et al., 1990; de Oca et al., 2007; thanforthestandarddefenseconditioningparadigmsdescribed
Canterasetal.,2010).Littleworkhasbeendoneontheneural above.
basisofdefenseresponsesotherthanfreezingthatareelicited Whilemuchoftheworkonthreatprocessinghasbeencon-
byaconditionedcues(butseedeOcaandFanselow,2004). ductedinrodents,manyofthefindingsapplytootherspecies.
Neuron73,February23,2012ª2012ElsevierInc. 657

Neuron
Perspective
For example, the amygdala nuclei involved in responding to visualcuesthatoccurinconnectionwithfooditemscanmodu-
conditioned threats in rodents appear to function similarly in late the energy/nutritional circuitry (e.g., Petrovich, 2011).
rabbits(Kappetal.,1992)andnonhumanprimates(Kalinetal., Specifically,areasoftheamygdala(LA,BA,ABA)processthese
2001, 2004; Antoniadis et al., 2007). Evidence also exists for learned cues associated with food and relay them to the LH.
homologous amygdala circuitry in reptiles (Martı´nez-Garcı´a Suchcues,ifsufficientlypotent,canstimulateeatinginanimals
etal.,2002;Daviesetal.,2002;BruceandNeary,1995)andbirds thataresated.
(Cohen,1974).Inaddition,functionalimagingandlesionresults Feedingdoesnotoccurinavacuum.Asnotedabove,when
fromhumans(e.g.,Phelps,2006;Damasio,1994,1999;LaBar threatlevelsrise,feedingissuppressed(Gray,1987;Limaand
andCabeza,2006;WhalenandPhelps,2009;Bu¨chelandDolan, Dill,1990;Blanchardetal.,1990;Fanselow,1994).Forexample,
2000;Mobbsetal.,2009;SchillerandDelgado,2010)showthat atonepreviouslypairedwithshockinhibitsfeeding(Petrovich,
theamygdalaplaysakeyroleindefenseconditioning,andthus 2011)andfood-motivatedinstrumentalbehavior(e.g.,Cardinal
suggestthat,atleasttoafirstapproximation,similarcircuitsare etal.,2002).Connectionsfromthebasolateralamygdalatothe
involvedinhumansasinothermammals.However,thelevelof LH facilitate feeding by a CS associated with food, while the
detail that has been achieved in humans pales in comparison suppression of feeding by an aversive CS involves outputs of
to the animal work. Methods available for studying humans the CEA. The exact target remains to be determined but CEA
are,andarelikelytocontinuetobe,limitedtolevelsofanatom- connects with LH both directly and indirectly (Petrovich et al.,
icalresolutionthatobscurecircuitdetails. 1996; Pitka¨nen et al., 1997). While threat processing normally
Becauseanimalresearchisthusessentialforrelatingdetailed trumpsfeeding,atsomepointtheriskofencounteringharmis
structuretofunctioninthebrain,itisextremelyimportantthatthe balanced against the risk of starvation. A similar case can be
phenomenaofinterestbeconceptualizedinawaythatismost madeforthesuppressionofotherbehaviorsbythreatprocess-
conducivetounderstandingtherelationoffindingsfromanimal ing. For example, medial amygdala areas that process threat
researchtothehumancondition.Survivalcircuitsprovidesuch related odors suppress reproduction via connections to VHM
aconceptualization. reproductivecircuits(Choietal.,2005).
The fact that the amygdala contributes to appetitive states
InteractionsbetweenSurvivalCircuitFunctions (e.g., Rolls, 1999, 2005; Everitt et al., 1999, 2003; Gallagher
Survivalcircuitsinteracttomeetchallengesandopportunities. and Holland, 1994; Holland and Gallagher, 2004; Cardinal
Indeed, survival functions are closely intertwined (e.g., Saper, etal.,2002;BaxterandMurray,2002;Moscarelloetal.,2009)
2006).Inthepresenceofathreattosurvivalorwell-being,the aswellasdefense(seeabove)doesnotmeanthattheamygdala
brain’s resources are monopolized by the task of coping with processesfoodandthreatrelatedcuesinthesameway.Simi-
the threat. Other activities, such as eating, drinking, and sex, larly,the factthat bothappetitive and aversive stimuli activate
are actively suppressed (Gray, 1987; Lima and Dill, 1990; theamgydalainfMRIstudies(e.g.,Canlietal.,2002;Hamann
Blanchard et al., 1990; Fanselow, 1994; Choi et al., 2005). etal.,2002;Laneetal.,1999)doesnotmeanthatthesestimuli
However, increased behavioral activity of any kind (fighting, areprocessedthesamebytheamygdala.Recentunitrecording
fleeing,foragingforfoodordrink,sexualintercourse)expends studiesinprimatesshowthatappetitiveandaversivesignalsare
energy, depleting metabolic resources. At some point, the processedbydistinctneuronalpopulationsofcellsinthelateral/
need to replenish energy rises in priority and overrides defen- basalamygdala(Patonetal.,2006;Belovaetal.,2007;Belova
sivevigilance,whichmightotherwisekeeptheanimalcloseto et al., 2008; Morrison and Salzman, 2010; Ono and Nishijo,
home. Foraging for food or liquids often requires exposure to 1992; Rolls, 1992, 1999, 2005). Molecular imaging techniques
threats and a balance has to be struck between seeking the withcellularresolutionshowthatsimilaritiesinactivationatthe
needed resources and staying put. Metabolic activity during levelofbrainareasobscuresdifferencesatthemicrocircuitlevel
any active behavior (whether fighting, feeding, foraging, forni- (Linetal.,2011).
cating)producesheatthathastobecounteractedbylowering
body temperature. Thermoregulation is controlled directly by CircuitFunctionsversusBehavioralResponses
homeostaticalterationsthatincludeincreasedsweatingorpant- Becausedifferentgroupsofmammalsfaceddifferentselective
ing, and by various behavioral means, such as altering fluid pressures, the behavioral responses controlled by conserved
intake or seeking shelter. We cannot consider all possible survivalcircuitscandiffer.Asethologistshavelongnoted,many
interactions between survival circuits here. Thus, interactions survival-related behaviors are expressed in species-specific
between the energy/nutritional regulation system and the ways(e.g.,Tinbergen,1951;Lorenz,1981;Manning,1967).
defensesystemwillbediscussedinsomedetailforillustrative Consider escape from a threat. We’ve seen evidence for
purposes. conserved defense circuits across mammals and even across
Across mammalian species, circuits involving the arcuate, vertebrates, but behavioral responses controlled by these
ventromeidal,dorsomedial,andlateralhypothalamus,andregu- circuits can differ dramatically. For example, while most
lated by leptin, ghrelin, glucose, and insulin, control feedingin mammals flee on all fours, some use only two legs (humans),
relation to energy and nutritional demands (Elmquist et al., others escape by flying (bats), and still others by swimming
2005; Morton et al., 2006; Saper et al., 2002; Saper, 2006). In (whales, seals, and walrus). Similarly, sexual and feeding
satisfying nutritional/energy demands, behavioral responses behavior,whilelargelyconservedattheneuralsystemlevel,is
areguidedbythesensorypropertiesofpotentialfoodsources also expressed behaviorally in diverse ways within mammals.
and by cues associated with food. For example, auditory or For example, although androgen activity in the hypothalamus
658 Neuron73,February23,2012ª2012ElsevierInc.

Neuron
Perspective
is important in all male mammals, the semen delivery process perceptual pattern. Moreover, humans can recognize certain
variesinmales,inpartbecauseofdifferentapproachesrequired emotions by the eyes alone and do not need to process the
giventheconfigurationofthemaleandfemalebody(e.g.,Pfaff, faceasawhole(e.g.,Whalenetal.,2004),andevidenceexists
1999). This is perhaps most dramatically illustrated by the thatthiscanbehandledsubcortically(Liddelletal.,2005;Morris
lordosispostureoffemalerats.Themalecannotinserthispenis etal.,1999;Tamiettoetal.,2009;Luoetal.,2007).Thesefind-
intothevaginalcavityofafemaleunlessshearchesherbackto ings are consistent with the notion that that relatively simple
adoptthisposture,whichisregulatedbythebindingofestrogen sensoryprocessingbysubcorticalareascanprovidetherequi-
duringthefertilephaseofhercycle(Pfaff,1999;Blaustein,2008). site inputs to structures such as the amygdala, bypassing or
Further,somemammalsusetheirsnoutswheneatingandothers short-circuiting cortical areas (LeDoux, 1996). In contrast to
theirpaws/hands,butthecorecircuitsdescribedabovenever- innate trigger stimuli, learned triggers are less restricted by
theless regulate the various homeostatic and behavioral func- species characteristics. Thus, many (though not all, as noted
tionsrequiredtoregulateenergyandnutritionalsupplies. above)stimulicanbeassociatedwithharmandbecomeatrigger
Thus, the responses used by survival circuits to achieve ofdefensecircuitslater.
survival goals can be species-specific even though the circuit Inthefieldofemotion,thetermautomaticappraisalissome-
islargelyspecies-general(obviously,theremustbesomediffer- times used when discussing how significant stimuli elicit so-
encesincircuitry,atleastintermsofmotoroutputcircuitryfor called emotional responses automatically (without deliberate
differentkinds of behaviors, butthecore circuit isconserved). control),andiscontrastedwithcognitiveorreflectiveappraisal,
Byfocusingontheevolvedfunctionofacircuit(defense,repro- where processing that is deliberate, controlled and often
duction,energyandnutritionmaintenance,fluidbalance,ther- conscious, determines stimulus meaning and predisposes
moregulation), rather than on the actual responses controlled actions(e.g.,Arnold,1960;Bowlby,1969;Frijda,1986;Lazarus,
bythecircuit,aspecies-independentsetofcriteriaemergefor 1991a,1991b;LeventhalandScherer,1987;LazarusandFolk-
definingbrainsystemsthatdetectsignificanteventsandcontrol man,1984;SmithandEllsworth,1985;Scherer,1988;Scherer
responses that help meet the challenges and opportunities etal.,2001;Sanderetal.,2005;Jarymowicz,2009).
posedbythoseevents. The stimulus significance evaluations by survival circuits are
obviously more in line with automatic, unconscious appraisal
InformationProcessingbySurvivalCircuits: mechanisms. However, while stimulus evaluations by survival
ComputationofStimulusSignificance circuitsisclearlyanexampleofautomaticappraisal,oneshould
A key component of a survival circuits is a mechanism for notbetooquicktoassumethatwhatpsychologistsrefertoas
computingcircuit-specificstimulusinformation.Adefensecircuit automaticappraisalsinhumansisidenticaltosurvivalcircuitpro-
needstobeactivatedbystimulirelatedtopredators,potentially cessing.Thelatterprobablyreferstoanarrowersetofphenomena
harmfulconspecifcs,andotherpotentialsourcesofharm,and thantheformer,atleastinhumans,ifnototherspecies,though
notbetriggered bypotentialmatesorfood items.Thegoalof therangeofphenomenainquestionclearlyoverlap.
such computational networks is to determine whether circuit-
specific triggers are present in the current situation, and, if MultipleRolesofInnateandLearnedStimuli
a trigger is detected, to initiate hard-wired (innate) responses Sofarwe’veseenthatunconditionedandconditionedemotional
thatareappropriatetothecomputedevaluation.Suchresponses stimulicanbethoughtofinotherterms,asunconditionedand
areautomaticallyreleased(intheethologicalsense—seeTinber- conditioned survival circuit triggers. In addition, though, they
gen,1951;Lorenz,1981;Manning,1967)bytriggerstimuli. can also be described as incentives—stimuli that motivate
The nature of behavioral responses released by survival instrumental behavior. The same stimuli additionally function
circuittriggersshouldbebrieflydiscussed.Activationofasurvival as reinforcers—stimuli that strengthen the probability that an
circuit elicits behavioral responses on the spot in some cases instrumentalresponsewillbelearnedandlaterperformed.Moti-
(e.g., in the presence of defense triggers) but in other cases vationandreinforcementareobviouslycloselyalignedwiththe
unlessthegoalobject(sexualpartner,food,drink)isimmediately topic of emotion, though these are often studied separately
present,themoregeneraleffectisthealterationofinformation today.Let’slookmorecloselyathowcloselyintertwinedthese
processing throughout the brain in such a way as to mobilize processesaretooneanother(Figure2).
resourcesforbringingtheorganismintoproximitywithsuitable Consider a tone that is paired with food. This is a typical
goalobjectsandthusdealingwiththeopportunityorchallenge methodusedtostudypositiveemotionalstatesinanimals.The
signaled bythe trigger. We will consider a number of different tone in other words is an appetitive Pavlovian CS that elicits
consequencesofsurvivalcircuitactivationbelow.Here,wefocus innateapproach behavior.However,itisalsoasurvivalcircuit
oninformationprocessingrelatedtotriggerdetection. trigger,asitcanstimulateeating,eveninsatiatedrats,byacti-
Abovewebrieflynotedthespecies-specificnatureofinnate vating hypothalamic circuits involved in energy management
triggerstimuli.Whiletheoriginalideaoftheethologistsfocused (Petrovich, 2011). The same CS will also function as a condi-
on complex Gestalt configural stimuli and pattern recognition, tioned incentive that can modulate instrumental behaviors
simplerfeaturesarenowemphasized.Thus,aratcanrecognize (incontrasttotheabilityofaCStoelicitPavlovianinnate(uncon-
apredator(cat,fox)byspecificchemicalconstituentsofpred- ditionedapproach)behaviors.Thus,aCSassociatedwithfood
atorodors(WallaceandRosen,2000;Vyasetal.,2007;Dielen- will facilitate performance of an instrumental response that is
bergetal.,2001;Markhametal.,2004;Blanchardetal.,2003) also maintained by food (e.g., bar-pressing for food) (Corbit
and does not have to recognize the predator as a complex andBalleine,2005;Cardinaletal.,2002;BalleineandKillcross,
Neuron73,February23,2012ª2012ElsevierInc. 659

Neuron
Perspective
Figure2. MultipleRolesforaConditioned
Stimulus
ACSfunctionsasasurvivalcircuittrigger(byactivating
aspecificsurvivalcircuitrelatedtotheUSthatwasused
duringconditioning),andasaconditionedincentiveand
aconditionedreinforcer(bywayofconnectionsfromthe
survival circuit to motivational and reinforcement
systems). Other routes by which a CS might influence
motivationalandreinforcementcircuitryarenotshown.
‘‘emotional.’’Theseareinnateorlearnedstimuli
that activate survival circuits and trigger the
expression of the innate responses controlled
by these circuits, that modulate the perfor-
manceoflearned(previouslyreinforced)instru-
mentalbehaviors,andthatleadtothereinforce-
mentofnewinstrumentalbehaviors(Table1).
MotivationintheSurvivalCircuitScheme
Emotion and motivation were traditionally
treatedasseparatetopics.Emotionwasviewed
as a reaction (e.g., a fearful, angry, disgusted,
joyful,orsademotionalreaction)tosomeenvi-
ronmental situation, and motivation as a drive
fromwithin(e.g.,hunger,thirst,orsexualdrive)
2006).ThisiscalledPavlovain-to-instrumentaltransfersincethe (e.g.,Hull,1943;Stellar,1954).Inthelate1960s,theemergence
valueofthePavlovianCSistransferredto(altersperformanceof) oftheconceptofincentiveshelpedbringthesetogether(Bindra,
the instrumental response. The degree of transfer depends in 1969;Trowilletal.,1969).Bindra(1969),forexample,arguedthat
partonthesimilarityoftheUSinthePavlovianandinstrumental emotion, like motivation, is influenced by internal factors (e.g.,
tasks.AtoneCScanalsobeusedtoreinforce thelearning of hormones)andmotivation,likeemotion,isimpactedbyexternal
a new instrumental response (e.g., Holland and Rescorla, stimuli(incentives).
1975). Thus, a hungry rat will learn to press a bar simply to Motivation, as assessed behaviorally, involves approach
receivethetoneCS.Inthiscasethetoneisconsideredarein- towarddesiredoutcomesandavoidanceofundesiredoutcomes
forcer,asecond-orderorconditionedreinforcer(afirstorderor (Tolman,1932;McClellandetal.,1953;Schneirla1959,Elliotand
primary reinforcer would be something like food itself rather Church,1997;Cofer,1972;CoferandAppley,1964;Miller,1944;
thanastimulusassociatedwithfood). Trowilletal.,1969;Bindra,1969;Davidson,1993;Gray,1982;
Similar relations hold for a tone paired with an aversive US, Langetal.,1990;Berridge,2004;Cardinaletal.,2002;Balleine
footshock. The tone CS elicits innate freezing behavior (see and Dickinson, 1998; Holland and Gallagher, 2004; Gallagher
above)andisthusoftendescribedasaconditionedemotional and Holland, 1994; Everitt and Robbins, 2005). So-called
stimulus(conditionedfearstimulusinthiscase).Andjustasan approach/avoidancemotivationoftenoccursintwostages:an
appetitiveCSenhancesbarpressingforfood,andaversiveCS anticipatory/exploratory/searchforgoalobjectsandtheperfor-
suppresses food-maintained bar pressing (Estes and Skinner, mance and consummatory responses (innate responses con-
1941;Hammond,1970;Cardinaletal.,2002;BalleineandKill- trolledbysurivialcircuits)oncegoalobjectsareinreach(Sher-
cross,2006).However,anaversiveCSwillalsofacilitateperfor- rington,1906;Tinbergen,1951;Cardinaletal.,2002;Berridge,
mance of an aversively motivated behavior (Hammond, 1970; 1999,2007).
La´zaro-Mun˜oz et al., 2010). Further, just as rats will learn to Theanticipatory/exploratory/searchphaseisguidedbyincen-
perform new instrumental responses for the sole reward of tives(Bindra,1968;Trowilletal.,1969;BalleineandDickinson,
receivinganappetitiveCS,theywillalsolearnnewinstrumental 1998; Cardinal et al., 2002; Johnson et al., 2009; Petrovich
responsesthatarerewardedbytheeliminationofanaversiveCS et al., 2002; Berridge, 1999, 2007, 2004; Rolls, 1999, 2005;
(e.g.,CainandLeDoux,2007). Glimcher, 2003).Incentives,asnoted,areessentiallyinnate or
Although we’ve focused on multiple roles of CSs a similar conditioned emotional stimuli; in other words, stimuli with the
argument can be made for USs. These are simply stimuli that potentialtoactivatesurvivalcircuits.
innately activate survival circuits, promote the performance of One of the key discoveries that led to the rise of incentive
consummatoryresponses(foodiseaten,sexisconsummated) views was that stimuli that lacked the ability to satisfy needs
intheirpresence,orsupportPavlovianassociativeconditioning and reduce drives (for example, the nonnutritive sugar substi-
orinstrumentalconditioning. tute saccharin) were nevertheless motivating (Sheffield and
Ifwechoose,wecanthusdescribeavarietyoftheeffectsof Roby, 1950; Cofer, 1972). A major consequence was that the
so-called ‘‘emotional’’ stimuli without the use of the adjective connectionbetweenmotivationandspecificfunctionalcircuits
660 Neuron73,February23,2012ª2012ElsevierInc.

Neuron
Perspective
Table1. MultipleRolesforSo-Called‘‘Emotional’’Stimuli
1.SurvivalCircuitTriggerStimulus Activatesaspecificsurvivalcircuit
Innate(Unconditioned)trigger Elicitsinnateresponsestostimuliwithouttheneedforpriorexposuretothestimulusand
mobilizesotherbrainresourcestodealwiththeopportunityorchallengepresented
bytheinnatetrigger
Learned(Conditioned)trigger Potentiallyelicitsinnateresponsestostimuliafterbeingassociated(viaPavlovian
conditioning)withaninnatetrigger;moregenerally,mobilizesbrainresourcestodeal
withthechallengeoropportunitysignaledbythelearnedtrigger
2.Incentive Modulatesinstrumentalgoal-directedbehaviortohelpmeettheopportunityorchallenge
signaledbythestimulusthatistriggeringactivationofaspecificsurvivalcircuit
Innate(unconditionedorprimary)incentive Increasesapproachtowardoravoidanceofthestimulusinanefforttoresolvethe
challengeoropportunitypresent
Learned(conditionedorsecondary)incentive Invigoratesandguidesbehaviortowardsituationswherethechallengeoropportunity
presentcanberesolved
3.Reinforcer SupportsthelearningofPavlovianorinstrumentalassociations
Innate(unconditionedorprimary)reinforce Inducestheformationofassociationswithneutralstimulithatoccurinitspresence
(throughPavlovianconditioning)andtotheformationofassociationswithresponses
thatleadtothepresentation(appetitivestimuli)orremoval(aversivestimuli)ofthe
stimulus(throughinstrumentalconditioning)
Learned(conditionedorsecond-order)reinforce Inducesformationofassociationswithotherstimuli(throughPavloviansecond-order
conditioning)orwithgoaldirectedresponses(throughsecond-orderinstrumental
conditioning)
(what we are calling survival circuits) began to be deempha- accumbens information processing segregated along motiva-
sized. Motivation became a somewhat generic process by tional lines—aversive and appetitive stimuli are processed
which behavior was invigorated and guided toward goals by separately at the cellular and molecular level (Roitman et al.,
incentives. 2005,2008).Whilemostworkisatthelevelofappetitiveversus
The nucleus accumbens emerged as a key focal point of aversive states, it would be important to determine whether
this general motivational system (Graybiel, 1976; Mogenson incentives related to different appetitive survival circuits (e.g.,
et al., 1980; Balleine and Killcross, 1994; Killcross and Rob- incentives related to food versus sex) are processed sepa-
bins, 1993; Everitt et al., 1999; Cardinal et al., 2002; Ikemoto rately.
andPanksepp,1999;Parkinsonetal.,1999;Koob,2009;Sesack Once incentives have guided the organism to goal objects,
and Grace, 2010; Berridge, 2007, 2009; Berridge and Robin- innate consummatory responses, which are specific to the
son, 1998; Hyman et al., 2006; Nestler, 2004; Kelley, 2004). particularsurvivalcircuitandfunction,areinitiated.Theirtermi-
Behavioral invigoration or energization was said to be a func- nation essentially ends the survival (emotional) episode—food
tionofdopaminereleaseintheaccumbensandincentivepro- iseaten,liquidisdrunk,sexisconsummated,safetyisreached.
cessing by the accumbens was thought to guide behavior Before leaving the topic of motivation of instrumental goal-
toward goals. Other areas involved in incentive motivation, directedbehavioritisimportanttomentionthatsuchbehaviors,
such as the obrbito-frontal cortex, are not considered here whenrepeatedlyperformedinrecurringsituations,canbecome
(seeRolls,1999,2005). habitualanddivorcedfromtheactualattainmentofthegoal.In
Akeyquestioniswhethermotivationisagenericprocessor such cases of stimulus-response habit formation, the neural
whether motivationally specific processing by survival circuits controlswitchesfromtheventraltothedorsalstriatum(Everitt
mightbesignificantaswell.Whiletheremayindeedbegeneric andRobbins,2005;Wickensetal.,2007;PackardandKnowlton,
aspects of motivation (e.g., behavioral invigoration), evidence 2002).
also supports motivationally specific information processing
as well. At the behavioral level, bar pressing for food by ReinforcementandSurvivalCircuits
a hungry obtain food is facilitated by a conditioned incentive Reinforcement and motivation are closely related. Things that
that signals food, is facilitated less by one that signals water motivateareoftenreinforcing,andviceversa.Likemotivation,
andisinhibitedbyonethatsignalsshock(CorbitandBalleine, reinforcement wasoncelinked todrivestates(Hull,1943),but
2005; Hammond, 1970), indicating that motivation is tied to drifted toward generic mechanisms over the years. The
specific survival functions. Lateral hypothalamic circuits that discoverythatbehaviorcouldbereinforcedbyelectricalstimu-
controlenergymaintenancethroughfeedingmodulatenucleus lation of brain areas (Oldsand Milner, 1954), and findings that
accumbensactivity(Searsetal.,2010).Theaccumbens,once electrical reinforcement could summate with different natural
thought to be mainly involved in processing appetitive stimuli, reinforcers (Coons and White, 1977; Conover and Shizgal,
isnowknowtocontributetotheprocessingofaversiveincen- 1994),werecompatiblewithagenericmechanismofreinforce-
tivesaswell(Salamone,1994;SchoenbaumandSetlow,2003; ment.Similarly,thataddictivedrugsandnaturalorelectricalrein-
Roitmanetal.,2005;ReynoldsandBerridge,2008).Withinthe forcers interact (Wise, 2006) is also consistent with a generic
Neuron73,February23,2012ª2012ElsevierInc. 661

Neuron
Perspective
mechanism. Further, influential mathematical models of rein- Schoberetal.,2011;Lang,1994;Pfaffetal.,2008).Asoriginally
forcement(e.g.,RescorlaandWagner,1972;SuttonandBarto, conceived,generalizedarousalwasafunctionofthebrainstem
1987)explainedlearningwithsingularlearningrules.Themodern reticularactivatingsystem(MoruzziandMagoun,1949;Lindsley,
paradigmaticexampleofagenericreinforcementmechanismis 1951). Later, the undifferentiated reticular activating system
theroleofdopamineinthestriatumasarewardpredictionerror concept gave way to the notion that distinct populations of
signal(Schultz,1997). chemically specific neurons that underlie sleep-wake cycles
Nevertheless, there have from time to time been calls for andthedegreeofarousal,attention,andvigilancewhileawake
linking reinforcement more directly to specific neurobiological (Jouvet,1969,1999;Steriade,1995,2004;Jacobsetal.,1990;
systems. For example, Glickman and Schiff (1967) proposed Jones,2003;Aston-Jones,2005;MontiandJantos,2008;Sarter
that reinforcement is a facilitation of activity in neural systems etal.,2005;ArnstenandLi,2005;Robbins,2005;Nieuwenhuys,
that mediate species-specific consummatory acts. In other 1985;Nishino,2011).Specifically,neuronsthatsynthesizeand
words,theyproposedalinkbetweenreinforcementandmotiva- releasebiogenicamines(norepinephrine,dopamine,serotoinin,
tionally-specificsurvivalcircuits.Itisthereforeofgreatinterest or acetylcholine) and peptides (e.g., orexins) are believed to
that recent work on the role of dopamine as a reward pre- make significant contributions to brain arousal. While these
diction error signal is beginning to recognize the importance transmittersarereleasedinwidespreadareasofthebrain,their
of specific motivational states in modulating the effects of effects are especially profound on neurons that are actively
dopamine as a reward prediction error signal (Schultz, 2006; engaged in information processing (Aston-Jones et al., 1991;
Glimcher,2011). Foote et al., 1983, 1991; Aston-Jones and Bloom, 1981). That
Theexpressionofreinforcementasachangeintheprobability is, they modulate rather than initiate neural activity, regulating
thataninstrumentalresponsewillbeperformedmaywelloccur neuronal excitability and neurotransmission (Schildkraut and
via a generic system in which the reinforcer strengthens the Kety, 1967; Hasselmo, 1995; Lopez and Brown, 1992). Also
response(e.g.,viacontributionsofdopamineinthestriatumto contributingtogeneralizedarousalareperipheralsystemsthat
reward prediction errors). But, in addition, survival circuit- release hormones into the circulation (e.g., cortisol released
specificmotivationalinformationislikelytocontributeatafunda- from the adrenal cortex, adrenergic hormones, epinephrine
mentallevel,providingthestimuluswiththemotivationalvalue andnorepinephrine,fromtheadrenalmedulla;andothers)(Axel-
thatallowsittoultimatelyengagethemoregenericmechanisms rod and Reisine, 1984; McEwen, 2009; Sapolsky et al., 1986).
thatstrengtheninstrumentalresponsesandthatmotivatetheir Cortisolcrossesthebloodbrainbarrierandbindstoreceptors
performance. inavarietyofareas,whileadrenergichormonesaffecttheCNS
Reinforcementprincipleshavebeenusedbysomeauthorsto indirectly (McGaugh, 2000). The modulatory effects of central
classify emotional states (e.g., Gray, 1982; Rolls, 1999, 2005; modulatorsarerelativelyrapid,whereastheeffectsofperipheral
Cardinaletal.,2002;Hammond,1970;Mowrer,1960).Inthese hormonesareconsiderablyslower,allowingtheprolongationof
models various emotions defined in terms of the presentation thesurvivalstateforextendedperiodsoftime.
orremovalofreinforcers.Mowrer(1960),forexample,proposed Generalizedarousalhasplayedakeyroleinanumberoftheo-
atheoryinwhichfear,hope,relief,anddisappointmentwereex- riesofemotionovertheyears(e.g.,Duffy,1941;Lindsley,1951;
plainedintheseterms.Laterauthorshaveattemptedtoaccount SchachterandSinger,1962;Schachter,1975;Schildkrautand
formoreconventionalemotions(fear,sadness,anger,pleasure, Kety,1967;Mandler,1975; Lang,1994;Robbins, 1997)and is
etc)asproductsofthepresentationorremovalofreinforcement. alsoimportantincontemporarydimensionaltheoriesofemotion
Thisapproachsuffersfromsomeofthesameproblemsasbasic (Russell,1980,2003;RussellandBarrett,1999)andsomeneural
emotionstheoryinthatitfocusesoncommonlanguagewords modelsofemotion(e.g.,DavisandWhalen,2001;Gallagherand
relatedtohumanfeelingsasthewaytoidentifyemotionmecha- Holland, 1994; Kapp et al., 1994; Lang and Davis, 2006).
nismsinthebrain.Perhapsreinforcement,likemotivation,might However,itisimportanttoaskhowgeneralizedarousalistrig-
befruitfullylinkedtoemotionalphenomenathroughthesurvival gered in emotional situations, and how the arousal, once
circuitconception. present, affects further processing. Again, the defense circuit
isusefulforillustrativepurposes.
SurvivalCircuitsandArousal Thedetectionofathreatbydefensecircuitsoftheamygdala
Survival circuits are engaged in situations in which challenges leadstotheactivationofcentralneuromodulatoryandperipheral
and/or opportunities exist, in other words what we commonly hormonalsystems(seeGray,1993;LeDoux,1992,1995;Davis,
callemotionalormotivatedsituations.Sofarwehavefocused 1992; Rodrigues et al., 2009). Thus, central amygdala outputs
on two major consequence of survival circuit activation. One target dendritic areas of norpeiphrine, dopamine, serotonin,
is the elicitation of specific kinds of hard-wired behavioral andacetylcholinecontainingneuronsandcausethesetorelease
reactions.Thesecondisanincreaseintheprobabilitythatinstru- theirchemicalproductsinwidespreadbrainareas(e.g.,Reyes
mentalgoal-directedactionsrelevanttotheopportunityorchal- etal.,2011;Gray,1993;Weinberger,1995;Kappetal.,1994).
lengewillbelearned(reinforced)andperformed(motivated)—or, Centralamygdalaoutputsalsotargetneuronsthatactivatethe
ifthesituationhasbeenexperiencedbytheindividualrepeatedly sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system, which
inthepast,stimulus-responsehabitsmaysubstituteforincen- releases adrenergic hormones from the adrenal medulla, and
tiveguidedinstrumentalgoal-directedaction. thehypothalamic-pituitary-adrenalaxis,whichreleasescortisol
Athirdconsequenceofsurvivalcircuitactivationis‘‘general- fromthe adrenalcortex(Gray,1993;Talarovicova etal.,2007;
ized arousal’’ (Moruzzi and Magoun, 1949; Lindsley, 1951; Loewy,1991;ReisandLeDoux,1987).Threatsthusnotonlyelicit
662 Neuron73,February23,2012ª2012ElsevierInc.

Neuron
Perspective
Figure3. ConsequencesofSurvivalCircuit
Activation
Whenasurvivalcircuittriggeractivatesasurvivalcircuit,
anumberofconsequencesfollow.(1)Innatebehavioral
responsesarepotentiallyactivated,aswellasautonomic
nervous system (ANS) responses and hormonal
responses.Theseeachgeneratefeedbacktothebrain.(2)
Neuromodulator systems are activated and begin to
regulateexcitabilityandneurotransmissionthroughoutthe
brain.(3)Goal-directedinstrumentalbehaviorisinitiated
by the motivation system. (4) Sensory, cognitive, and
explicit memory systems are also affected, leading to
enhancedattentiontorelevantstimuliandtheformationof
newexplicitmemories(memoriesformedbythehippo-
campusandrelatedcorticalareas)andimplicitmemories
(memoriesformedwithinthesurvivalcircuit).
GlobalOrganismicStates
Survivalcircuitactivationleadstothetriggering
of arousal responses in the CNS and to the
potential expression of innate behaviors (de-
pending on the circumstances), as well as
expression of autonomic nervous system and
hormonal responses in the body. Behavioral,
autonomic,andendocrineresponsesfeedback
to the brain and also contribute to arousal. In
addition, motivational systems are activated,
potentially leading to goal-directed behaviors
(Figure 3). The overallresult of survival circuit-
specificdefenseresponsesbutalsoinitiategeneralizedarousal specific activity, motivational activity, and generalized arousal
inthebrainandbody.Bodyfeedbackhasplayedanimportant istheestablishmentofastateinwhichbrainresourcesarecoor-
role in emotion theory for more than a century (James, 1884; dinated and monopolized for the purpose of enhancing the
Lange, 1885/1922; Schachter and Singer, 1962; Tomkins, organism’sabilitytocopewithachallengeand/orbenefitfrom
1962; Adelmann and Zajonc, 1989; Buck, 1980; Damasio, opportunities. The organism becomes especially attentive to
1994,1999). andsensitivetostimulirelevanttothesurvivalfunction,memo-
One consequence of this pattern of connectivity is that riesrelevanttothesurvivalfunctionareretrieved,andpreviously
central and peripheral arousal signals facilitate processing in learnedinstrumentalresponsesrelevanttothesurvivalfunction
the survival circuit that triggered the activation of arousal. arepotentiated.Newlearningoccursandnewexplicitmemories
This establishes a loop in which continued activation of the (via the hippocampus and related cortical areas) and implicit
survival circuit by external stimuli produces continued activa- memories (memories stored in the survival circuit) are formed.
tionofthemodulatorrelease,whichinturnfacilitatestheability Suchstateswillbereferredtohereasglobalorganismicstates.
of external stimuli to continue to drive the survival circuit. The fact that these states are global does not mean that they
Indeed, modulators facilitate activity in sensory processing completelylackspecificity.Theyincludesurvivalcircuit-specific
areas(e.g.,Hurleyetal.,2004),whichshouldenhanceattention components, as well as general motivational components that
to external stimuli present during survival circuit activation. control instrumental behavior and components that control
Modulators also facilitate processing areas involved in re- nonspecificorgeneralizedarousalwithinthebrainandbody.
trieving forming, and storing memories (McGaugh, 2003; Roo- The notion that emotional and motivated states have pro-
zendaal et al., 2009). All of these effects are recapitulated in found effects on the brain, recruiting widespread areas into
motivational circuits once the initial reaction begins to give the service of the immediate situation, monopolizing and/or
waytogoal-directedinstrumentalactions.Forexample,dopa- synchronizing brain resources, has been proposed previously
mine contributes to the invigoration or activation of behavior (Gallistel, 1980; Maturana and Varela, 1987; Scherer, 2000;
duringtheexploratorysearchphaseofamotivatedstate(Ber- LeDoux,2002,2008).Particularlyrelevantisthe‘‘centralmotive
ridge2004;BerridgeandRobinson,1998;RobbinsandEveritt, state’’ hypothesis (Morgan, 1943; Hebb, 1949; Bindra, 1969).
2007). Norepinephrine, serotoin, acetylcholine, orexins and Yet,theexactnatureofglobalorganismicstatesispoorlyunder-
other modulators also contribute. While arousal is often dis- stood.Inpartthisislikelyattributabletothelackoftechniques
cussed in terms of generic (generalized) mechanisms, the for assessing neural activity across widespread areas of the
possibility that some aspects of arousal might be survival brainatasufficientlydetailedlevelofresolution.Measurement
circuit specific should also be explored (Pfaff et al., 2008; of BOLDactivity in the brains of humansoranimals withfMRI
Schober et al., 2011). allows whole brain analysis of functional activity, but lacks
Neuron73,February23,2012ª2012ElsevierInc. 663

Neuron
Perspective
spatialresolutionatthelevelofcellsandcircuits.Useofmolec- so, the key to understanding the relation of survival functions
ular markers, such as the expression of immediate early gene across invertebrates and vertebrates is likely to involve con-
activity,inrelationtobehaviorholdspromise.Particularlyimpor- servedprinciplesoforganizationatthemicrocircuitlevelrather
tantwouldbethedevelopmentoftechniquesthatcouldprovide similarity of anatomical structures or molecules (David Ander-
widespreadsimultaneousassessmentofchangesinbodyphys- son, personal communication). Very interesting examples are
iology and brain activation and related to survival circuit pro- emergingfromstudiesofolfactoryprocessing,forwhichanalo-
cessing,general-purposemotivationalprocessing,andgeneral- gies in behaviorally relevant peripheral odor-encoding and
izedarousal. centralrepresentationoccurusingsimilarorganizationalprinci-
ples in anatomically distinct (nonhomologous) structures in
TranscendingNeuroanatomicalHomology:Survival Drosophila and rodents (see Bargmann, 2006; Sosulski et al.,
throughouttheAnimalWorld 2011;Wangetal.,2011).
Invertebrates do not have the same conserved circuits that Survivalfunctionsinstantiatedinspecificneuralcircuitslikely
vertebrateshave.However,theyfacemanyofthesameprob- reflect conserved neural principles. We should at least be
lems of survival thatvertebratesdo: they mustdefend against amenabletothepossibilitythatdefense,reproduction,andother
danger, satisfy energy and nutritional needs, maintain fluid survivalfunctionsinhumans,mayberelatedtosurvivalfunctions
balance and body temperature, and reproduce. As in verte- ininvertebrates.Thisnotionisnotlikelytobesurprisingtocard
brates, specific circuits are associated with such functions, carrying comparative neurobiologist, but might meet more
though different invertebrates have different nervous systems resistance from researchers who study humans since survival
anddifferentcircuits. functionsaccountforsomefundamentalemotionalfunctionsin
The fact that invertebrate nervous systems are diverse and humans, and in humans emotions are often equated with or
differ from the canonical vertebrate nervous system does not closely tied to feelings. But the thrust of what has been said
meantheinvertebratesareirrelevanttounderstandingsurvival hereisthatsurvivalfunctionsshouldnotbetreatedasqualita-
functions(andthusso-calledemotionalbehavior)invertebrates. tively differently in humans and other mammals, in mammals
Muchprogressisbeingmadeinunderstandinginnatebehaviors andothervertebrates,invertebratesandinvertebrates.Asnoted
relatedtosurvivalfunctionssuchasdefense,reproductionand earlier,acasecanevenbemadethatsolutionstofundamental
arousalininvertebratessuchasDrosophila(Wangetal.,2011; problems of survival are in the final analysis derived from
Lebestkyetal.,2009;Dickson,2008)andC.elegans(McGrath solutions to these problems present primordial single-cell
etal.,2009;PirriandAlkema,2012;Garrityetal.,2010;Bende- organisms.
sky et al. 2011). In these creatures, as in mammals and other
vertebrates, G protein-coupled receptors and their regulators SurvivalCircuitsandHumanFeelings:WhatIsAn
play key rolesin modulating neuronal excitability and synaptic EmotionalState?
strength,andinsettingthethresholdforbehavioralresponses Whentheterm‘‘emotionalstate’’isused,theusertypicallyhas
to incentives associated with specific motivational/emotional thenotionof‘‘feeling’’inmind.Thisarticleisanattempttorede-
states (Bendesky and Bargmann, 2011). Biogenic amines and finethenatureofsuchstates,atleastthecomponentsofsuch
theirGprotein-coupledreceptorsalsoplayakeyroleinarousal states that are shared across mammalian species (and likely
and behavioral decision making in Drosophila (Lebestky et al., across vertebrates, and to some extent in invertebrates as
2009)andC.elegans(Bendeskyetal.,2011)asinvertebrates well).Nevertheless,thehistoryofemotionresearchandtheory
(seeabove),andgeneticmechanismsunderlyingsurvival-based isforthemostpartthehistoryoftryingtounderstandwhatfeel-
learning in invertebrates. For example, such as in Aplysia cali- ings are and how they come about. It is thus important to
fornica manyof the neurotransmitters (e.g., glutamate), neuro- commentonthenatureoffeelingsandtheirrelationtosurvival
modulators (e.g., serotonin, dopamine), intracellular signals circuits.
(e.g., proteinkinaseA,map kinase),transcriptionfactors(e.g., One might be tempted to conclude that global organismic
cyclic AMP response element binding protein) involved in states, or at least the central representation of such sates,
defenseconditioningAplysia(e.g.,Hawkinsetal.,2006;Kandel, constituteneuralcorrelatesoffeelings.Globalorganismicstates
2001; Carew and Sutton, 2001; Glanzman, 2010; Mozzachiodi makemajorcontributionstoconsciousfeelingsbutthetwoare
andByrne,2010)havebeenimplicatedindefenseconditioning notthesame.Globalorganismicstatesarepartoftherawmate-
inthemammalianamygdala(seeJohansenetal.,2011).Further, rialfromwhichcertainclassesoffeelingsareconstructed(those
studiesinDrosophilahaveimplicatedsomeofthesameintracel- feelings associated with survival circuit activation). But they
lularsignalsandtranscriptionfactorsindefense-basedlearning could, and likely do, exist, independent of feelings, at least in
(Dudai,1988;Yovelletal.,1992;YinandTully,1996;Margulies relationtowhathumanscallfeelings.Myproposalisthatthese
etal.,2005). kinds of feelings (those associated with survival circuit activa-
Similaritiesatthecellularandmolecularlevel,andpresumably tion) occur in humans when consciousness (1) detects that
at the level of genes that encode these processes, across asurvivalcircuitisactiveorwitnessestheexistenceofaglobal
diversegroupsofanimalsisimpressiveevidenceforconserved organismic state initiated by the activation of a survival circuit
principles of organization underlying survival functions. How- in the presence of particular kind of challenge or opportunity
ever, an important question is whether there might be more and (2) appraises and labels this state. These arenot the only
fundamentalcircuitprinciplesthatareinstantiatedatthemicro- kindsoffeelingsthatcanoccurinhumans.Otherkindsinclude
circuitlevelinnervoussystemsthataresuperficiallydistinct.If feelings associated with higher-order or social emotions (guilt,
664 Neuron73,February23,2012ª2012ElsevierInc.

Neuron
Perspective
shame,envy,pride)orsensoryfeelings(apleasanttouchoran attempted this (Panksepp, 1982; 1998, 2000; 2005), but few
annoyingitch). scientistsareconvincedthatthisisthewaytogo,asthereisno
What about other animals? To the extent that nonhuman waytoobjectivelyverifywhatanotherorganismexperiences.
organisms have consciousness and cognition, capacities that Sowhat’sthedifference,ifany,betweenattributingfeelingsto
allowtheobservation,appraisal,andcategorizationofsurvival otherpeopleandtootheranimals?Thereisastrongrationaliza-
circuitactivityorglobalorganismicstates,theycanhavefeelings tionforassumingallhumanshavesubjectivementalstates,such
whensurvivalcircuitactivityorglobalorganismicstatesoccur. as feelings, that are similar in kind. In the absence of genetic
Totheextentthatthemechanismsofconsciousnessandcogni- mutations of the nervous system or acquired brain damage,
tion differ in different animals (with humans included as an each human possesses the same basic kind of brain, a brain
animal), and to the extent that the mechanisms underlying withthesamebasicneuralsystems,aseveryotherhuman.As
survival circuit or global organismic states themselves differ, aresultweexpectthatotherpeoplehavethesamekindsofbasic
feelings will be different. This leaves open the possibility that brain functions, and corresponding mental capacities, that we
conscious feelings can be present in other mammals, other have, and we can assume with some confidence that other
vertebrates,orevenininvertebrates.Butratherthanengaging people experience the same kinds of feelings we do whenwe
in idle speculation about this, criteria can be offered that can theybehavethe way webehavewhenwehavethose feelings
help address the question. Specifically, if we can understand (unlesstheyarebeingintentionallydeceitful).Wecantherefore
what underlies conscious feelings in humans, we can then fairlycomfortablyapplyourintrospectionsaboutourownfeelings
search for whether those mechanisms are present, and to tothementalstatesofotherpeopleonthebasisoftheirbehavior.
whatextenttheyarepresent,inotheranimals. Weshouldnot,however,besocomfortable intalkingabout
This, you probably noticed, is a different approach from the the mental states of other species because their brains differ
oneadvocatedearlierforsurvivalcircuits.Wenowaskwhether fromours.Akeyquestion,ofcourse,iswhethertheirbrainsdiffer
processesin humansarepresentin otheranimals. Butjustas fromoursinwaysthatmatter.Inotherwords,dothebrainareas
the survival circuit question should be asked about whether responsibleforstatesofconsciousness,suchasfeelings,differ
mechanismsinotheranimalsarepresentinhumans,theques- inhumansandotheranimals?
tion of whether mechanisms shown to be present in humans There is considerable support for the idea that states of
are present in other animals seems only addressable in the consciousnessaremadepossible,atleastinpart,throughthe
other direction. We can never know whether another animal representationofexperienceinacognitiveworkspaceinvolving
has conscious emotional feelings, but we might be able to neocortical areas, especially prefrontal and parietal cortical
determine whether the mechanisms that make of conscious- areas (Crick and Koch, 1990, 2004, Dehaene and Changeux,
ness and feelings possible in humans also present in other 2004,Baars,2005;FrithandDolan,1996;Frithetal.,1999;Frith,
animals. 2008; Shallice, 1988; Shallice et al., 2008). To the extent that
Thefactisthatthebrainmechanismsthatunderlieconscious feelingsarestatesofconsciousnessaboutemotionalsituations,
emotional feelings in humans are still poorly understood. they should be represented in these cognitive workspace
However, this should not stand in the way of understanding circuits(LeDoux,1996,2002,2008).Theideaproposedhereis
survival functions and the states that occur in the brain when that conscious feelings result when global organismic states
thecircuitsmediatingsurvivalfunctionsareactivated.Thereis arerepresentedinthecognitiveworkspace.Thebasicingredi-
muchworktobedoneevenifwedon’thaveviablesolutionsto ents of the global organismic state would include information
theproblemsofconsciousfeelings. aboutthestimulusandotheraspectsofthesocialandphysical
Researchonfeelingsiscomplicatedbecausefeelingscannot environment, the survival circuit the stimulus activates, CNS
be measured directly. We rely on the outward expression of arousal initiated by the survival circuit, feedback from survival
emotional responses, or on verbal declarations by the person responsesthatareexpressedinthebody,andlong-termmemo-
experiencingthefeeling,aswaysofassessingwhatthatperson ries(episodicandsemantic)aboutthestimulusandaboutthere-
is feeling. This is true both when scientists do research on sultingstate(Figure4).Thus,inthepresenceofasurvivalcircuit
emotions,andwhenpeoplejudgeemotionsintheirsocialinter- trigger (a.k.a. an emotional stimulus), the various ingredients
actionswithoneanother. would be integrated, and the resulting state categorized by
Whennotwearingascientifichat,mostofusapplyintrospec- matching the state with long-term memory stores. When this
tivelybasedconceptstootheranimals.Whenadeerfreezesto occurs,aconsciousfeelingoftheglobalorganismicstatebegins
thesoundofashotgunwesayitisafraid,andwhenakittenpurrs toexist.Suchastate,havingbeencategorizedonthebasisof
oradogwagsitstail,wesayitishappy.Inotherwords,weuse memoriesofsimilarstates,couldbedimensionalinnature(just
words that refer to human subjective feelings to describe our basedonarousalandvalence)orcouldtakeonspecificqualities
interpretation of what isgoing on in theanimal’s mindwhen it (couldbemorelikewhatonefeltwhenpreviouslyindangerthan
actsinwaythathassomesimilaritytothewayweactwhenwe whenfrustratedorwhenenjoyingatastymeal).Labelingofthe
have those feelings. Some authors also claim that similarity of statewithemotionwordsaddsadditionalspecificitytotheexpe-
behaviorisstronglysuggestiveofsimilarityatthelevelofsubjec- rience,creatingspecificfeelings(fear,pleasure,disgust,etc).
tiveexperience(Panksepp, 1998,2005)ormoregenerally that Dorsolateralprefrontalcortex,akeycomponentofthecogni-
humansknowwhatananimalfeelsfromobservingitsbehavior tiveworkspace,islackinginmostothermammals,andisless
(Bekoff, 2007; Masson and McCarthy, 1996). But it’s hard to developedinnonhumanprimatesthaninhumans(Reep,1984;
justify anthropomorphic speculation in science. Panksepp has Braak, 1980; Preuss, 1995; Wise, 2008). In humans, granular
Neuron73,February23,2012ª2012ElsevierInc. 665

Neuron
Perspective
emotional states in broad strokes without language but it is
unlikelythatspecificemotions(fear,anger,sadness,joy)could
comeaboutwithoutwords.Accordingly,lackinglanguageand
emotionwords,ananimalbraincannotpartitionemotionalexpe-
rience in this way. In short, the language of emotion likely
contributestotheexperiencesonehasin emotionalsituations
(Schachter, 1975; Johnson-Laird and Oatley, 1989; Scherer,
1984; Reisenzein, 1995). Indeed, different cultures and their
languagesexpressemotionsdifferently(KitayamaandMarkus,
1994; Wierzbicka, 1994; Averill, 1980). The dimensional theory
of emotion views emotion words as markers in a multidimen-
sional semantic space of feelings (Russell, 1980; Russell and
Barrett, 1999). The dimensional theory is incompatible with
abasicemotionsview,sincethelatterarguesthatfeelingsasso-
ciatedwithbasicemotionsareduetohard-wiredcircuits,butis
compatible with the survival circuit view, which posits indirect
Figure4. IngredientsofFeelingsinaCognitiveWorkspace
andnonobligatory,asopposedtocasual,linksbetweensurvival
An emotional feeling is hypothesized to be a representation of a global
organismicstateinitiatedbyanexternalstimulus.Therepresentationincludes circuitsandfeelings.
sensoryinformationaboutthestimulusandthesocialandphysicalcontext, Buttheimpactoflanguagegoesfarbeyondsimplesemantics
informationaboutthesurvivalcircuitthatisactive,informationaboutCNS
andlabeling.Weusesyntacticprocessestoevaluatethelogical
arousal, body feedback information, and mnemonic information about the
stimulussituationandthestateitself.Whensuchaglobalorganismicstateis truth of propositional statements. While not all human thought
categorizedandlabeledaconsciousfeelingofacertaintype(e.g.afeelingof involvespropositionalstatementsandlogic,syntacticprocess-
fear,pleasure,disgust,etc)results.Totheextentthatanyofthesecomponents ing provides the human brain and mind with unique features
differinhumanandnonhumanspecies,thenatureoftheresultingstatewould
andadvantages.Throughsyntax,thehumanmindcansimulate
differaswell.
whowilldowhattowhominasocialsituationinstantaneously
ratherthanhavingtolearnbytrialanderror.
prefrontalcortexalsohasuniquecellularfeatures(Semendeferi Sowhatthenmightabatoraratexperiencewithoutthekindof
et al., 2011). Given that feelings are a category of conscious cerebral hardware that is characteristic of the human brain?
experience, the usual mechanisms of conscious experience Somehaveproposedthatinadditiontofullblownfeelingsthat
should be at work when we have emotional experiences (Le- humanstalkabout,morebasic,lessdifferentiatedfeelings(crude
Doux, 1996, 2002, 2008). And given that some of the neural statesofpositiveornegativevalence,ormaybeevensomewhat
mechanisms involved in conscious representations may be finer categories based on memory of feelings from the past in
different in humans and other animals, we should be cautious similarsituations)mayexistinotheranimals.Suchstateshave
inassumingthatthesubjectivelyexperiencedphenomenathat been called core affects (Panksepp, 1998, 2005; Damasio.
humans label as feelings are experienced by other animals 1994,1999;Barrettetal.,2007;Russell,2003).Whilewecannot
when they engage in behaviors that have some similarity to ask other animals about their feelings, studies of humans can
humanemotionalbehavior.Inshort,ifthecircuitsthatgiverise begintounravelhowsuchstatesareexperienced.Similarityof
to conscious representations are different in two species, we the structure of these circuits in animals might then provide
cannot use behavioral similarity to argue for similarity of insight into their function in other animals (Panksepp, 1998,
consciousfeelingsfunctionally.Theseobservationsaddneuro- 2005),providedthatwedoagoodjobofclarifyingthefunction
biological substance to the point famously argued by the ofthecircuitsinquestion(seesurvivalcircuitdiscussionabove).
philosopher Thomas Nagel. He proposed that only a bat can Consciousnessandfeelingsaretopicsthatarebeststudiedin
experiencetheworldlikeabat,andonlyahumancanexperi- humans.Researchontheneuralbasisoffeelingsinhumansisin
ence the world like a human (Nagel, 1974). We should resist its infancy (Panksepp, 1998; 2005; Damasio, 2003; Damasio
theinclinationtoapplyourintrospectionstootherspecies. etal.,2000;Ochsneretal.,2002;Barrett etal.,2007;Rudrauf
Also,given thathumansaretheonlyorganismswithnatural etal.,2009;Critchleyetal.,2004;Pollatosetal.,2007).Wewill
language, and language allows a unique mode of information neverknowwhatananimalfeels.Butifwecanfindneuralcorre-
processing in the human brain, we need to be very cautious latesofconsciousfeelingsinhumans(anddistinguishthemfrom
when we make assumptions about nonhuman behavior correlates of unconscious emotional computations in survival
regardingprocessesthatlanguageaffects.Whiletheideathat circuits),andshowthatsimilarcorrelatesexistsinhomologous
language affects thought and conscious experience (Whorf, brainregionsinanimals,thensomebasisforspeculatingabout
1956)wasoutoffavorforawhile,ithasreemergedasanimpor- animalfeelingsandtheirnaturewouldexist.Whilesuchspecula-
tantprincipleinrecenttimes(Lakoff,1987;Lucy,1997).Oneway tions would be empirically based, they would nevertheless
thatlanguageisimportantisthatitallowsthesemanticcatego- remainspeculations.
rization of experience, including emotional experience. For
example,therearemorethan30wordsinEnglishforgradations FutureDirectionsofResearch
of fear (fear, panic, anxiety, worry, trepidation, consternation, Therearemanytopicsthatneedfurtherexplorationinthestudy
etc.)(Marks,1987).Thehumanbrainmaybeabletocategorize ofemotionalphenomenainthebrain.Thefollowinglistismeant
666 Neuron73,February23,2012ª2012ElsevierInc.

Neuron
Perspective
topointoutafewofthemanyexamplesandisnotmeanttobe techniques are beginning to allow such differences to
exhaustive. beexploredatthecellularlevelacrossthewholebrain.
ArecentstudybyLinetal.(2011)showingdistinctpopu-
1. The circuits underlying defense in rodents is fairly well lations of cells in the ventromedial hypothalamus that
characterizedandprovidesagoodstartingpointforfur- contribute to mating and intruder attack is a prime
theradvancement.Animportantfirststepiselucidation example. Genetic tools can also be used to provide
oftheexactrelationbetweeninnateandlearneddefense more detailed information about connectivity, including
circuits. Paradigms should be devised that directly connectivityatthelevelofbrainareasbutalsobetween
comparecircuitsthatareactivatedbyinnateandlearned specificcelltypes.Suchapproacheshavebeguntobe
cuesofthesamesensorymodalityandthatelicitsimilar usedbutsystematicstudiesareneeded.
behavioraldefenseresponses(freezing,escape,attack, 6. Itisgenerallyassumedthatcircuitsunderlyingdefense,
etc). Comparisons should proceed in stepwise fashion energy, fluid balance, reproduction, thermoregulation,
within a species, with variation in the stimulus and and other survival functions interact, but this has been
response modalities (though mundane, systematic not been studied to any significant degree. This is a
studiesareimportant). particularly important topic that is best pursued by
2. Moreinformationisalsoneededregardingthemannerin methods that allow evaluation of concurrent activity in
whichexternalstimulifunctionasdefensetriggers,incen- the multiple brain areas, such as fMRI in humans and
tives, and reinforcers within defense circuits. Tasks fMRI and molecular imaging in animals. Studies com-
shouldbedevelopedthatcanbereadilyappliedacross paring activity patterns across the whole brain in
species,butatthesametimeeasilytailoredtospecies- response processing signals related to various survival
specific factors. Further exploration of whether there circuit functions could provide very important informa-
are different circuits for defense in different contexts tion,especiallyifanimalandhumanprojectsuserelated
wouldalsobeuseful. behavioralparadigms.Ifhomologiesarefoundatthelevel
3. Howdoinnateandlearnedstimulitrigger,motivateand of brain areas between humans and other mammals,
reinforce behaviors in nondefense survival circuits? molecular imaging can be used in animal studies to
Whataretheevaluativemechanismsthatprocesssuch searchforuniquemicrocircuitsthatdifferentiatebetween
stimuliwithinspecificsurvivalcircuits(e.g.,energy/nutri- functionsandthecellularandsynapticlevel.
tion, fluid balance, reproduction, etc)? While incentives 7. Techniquesareneededtoassessphysiological activity
and reinforcers have been studied extensively in the atthecellularlevelacrossthewholebrainandthroughout
contextofgenericappetitiveprocesses,alsoofinterest the body (global organismic states) in the presence of
istherelationofsuchstimulitothespecificsurvivalcircuit biological significant stimuli (triggers of survival circuit
onwhichtheydepend. activityormotivatingincentives,)andduringtheperfor-
4. Can survival circuits be further differentiated? For mance of innate or learned survival responses as well
example, to what extent do different forms of defense as goal directed responses. It will be especially useful
utilize different circuits? Beyond classifications based to develop analytic tools that will be able to separate
onthesensorymodalitythatdetectsthreatsandwhether contributionsthataresurvivalcircuitspecificfrommore
the threat is learned or unlearned, are there different general purpose mechanisms, such as nonspecific
circuitsforthreatsrelatedtoconspecifics,predators,in- arousal,andgenericaspectsofreinforcementandinstru-
gested substances, territory, etc. Similar questions mentalbehaviorcontrol.
arisesforeachsurvivalcircuitcategory. 8. Morecomparativeworkisneededtoelucidatesimilari-
5. When a given brain area is involved in multiple survival ties and differences in survival functions and circuits
functions, an effort should be made to determine the between various groups of vertebrates. Particularly
extent to which underlying cellular mechanisms might pressingarestudiesofnon-mammalianvertebrates.
make distinct contributions. For example, the LA and 9. Whatistherelationofsurvivalfunctionsininvertebrates
BA and nucleus accumbens have been implicated in tovertebrates?Arethereconservedmoleculesorgenes,
defensive and appetitive behaviors. As noted above, or conserved computational principles, that underlie
single unit recordings suggest some independence of anatomically distinct kinds of circuits but that perform
responses to aversive and appetitive stimuli in these similar survival functions in vertebrates and inverte-
areas.However,questionsremain.Doamygdalaorac- brates?
cumbens cells simply encode positive and negative 10. Explorations of the mechanisms underlying conscious
valence or are they tied to more specific survival func- emotional feelings in humans should be pursued more
tions? This is readily explored by examining cellular vigorously,includingfull-blownconsciousfeelings(feel-
responses toincentivestimuli relateddifferent formsof ingsoffear,joy,sadness,shame,embarrassment)and
appetitive motivation. For example, do the cells that coarser conditions (pleasant or unpleasant feelings).
respond to incentives related to food, drink and repro- Thisinformationisimportantbecausefeelingsaresuch
duction overlap or are they survival-function specific? a defining feature of human mental life. But in addition
Single unit recordings are often restricted to one or with such information it will then be possible to ask if
a small number of brain areas. New molecular imaging the required mechanisms of a given kind of conscious
Neuron73,February23,2012ª2012ElsevierInc. 667

Neuron
Perspective
state are present in other animals. Even if the mecha- Averill, J. (1980). Emotion and anxiety: Sociocultural, biological, and
nisms are present, the results would not allow the psychologicaldeterminants.InExplainingemotions,A.O.Rorty,ed.(Berkeley:
UniversityofCaliforniaPress).
conclusion that other animals have feelings that are
homologous with human feelings. However, such a re- Axelrod,J.,andReisine,T.D.(1984).Stresshormones:theirinteractionand
regulation.Science224,452–459.
sult would at least provide a basis for saying whether
there is a physical possibility for such states in other Baars, B.J. (2005). Global workspace theory of consciousness: toward a
animals. cognitiveneuroscienceofhumanexperience.Prog.BrainRes.150,45–53.
Balleine,B.W.,andDickinson,A.(1998).Goal-directedinstrumentalaction:
contingencyandincentivelearningandtheircorticalsubstrates.Neurophar-
Conclusion macology37,407–419.
Thesurvivalcircuitconceptprovidesaconceptualizationofan Balleine,B.,andKillcross,S.(1994).Effectsofibotenicacidlesionsofthe
important set of phenomena that are often studied under the nucleusaccumbensoninstrumentalaction.Behav.BrainRes.65,181–193.
rubric of emotion—those phenomena that reflect circuits and Balleine,B.W.,andKillcross,S.(2006).Parallelincentiveprocessing:aninte-
functions that are conserved across mammals. Included are gratedviewofamygdalafunction.TrendsNeurosci.29,272–279.
circuits responsible for defense, energy/nutrition manage-
Bargmann, C.I. (2006). Comparative chemosensation from receptors to
ment,fluidbalance,thermoregulation,andprocreation,among ecology.Nature444,295–301.
others. With this approach, key phenomena relevant to the
Barrett,L.F.(2006a).AreEmotionsNaturalKinds?Perspect.Psychol.Sci.1,
topic of emotion can be accounted for without assuming that 28–58.
the phenomena in question are fundamentally the same or
Barrett, L.F. (2006b). Solving the emotion paradox: categorization and the
even similar to the phenomena people refer to when they use
experienceofemotion.Pers.Soc.Psychol.Rev.10,20–46.
emotion words to characterize subjective emotional feelings
(like feeling afraid, angry, or sad). This approach shifts the Barrett,L.F.,Lindquist,K.A.,Bliss-Moreau,E.,Duncan,S.,Gendron,M.,Mize,
J.,andBrennan,L.(2007).OfMiceandMen:NaturalKindsofEmotionsinthe
focus away from questions about whether emotions that MammalianBrain?AResponsetoPankseppandIzard.Perspect.Psychol.
humansconsciouslyexperience(feel)arealsopresentinother Sci.2,297–311.
mammals, and toward questions about the extent to which
Baxter,M.G.,andMurray,E.A.(2002).Theamygdalaandreward.Nat.Rev.
circuits and corresponding functions that are relevant to the Neurosci.3,563–573.
field of emotion and that are present in other mammals are
Bekoff,M.(2007).TheEmotionalLivesofAnimals:Aleadingscientistexplores
also present in humans. And by reassembling ideas about animaljoy,sorrow,andempathy-andwhytheymatter(Novato,CA:New
emotion, motivation, reinforcement, and arousal in the con- WorldLibrary).
text of survival circuits, hypotheses emerge about how
Belova,M.A.,Paton,J.J.,Morrison,S.E.,andSalzman,C.D.(2007).Expecta-
organisms negotiate behavioral interactions with the environ- tionmodulatesneuralresponsestopleasantandaversivestimuliinprimate
ment in process of dealing with challenges and opportunities amygdala.Neuron55,970–984.
in daily life. Belova, M.A., Paton, J.J., and Salzman, C.D. (2008). Moment-to-moment
trackingofstatevalueintheamygdala.J.Neurosci.28,10023–10030.
REFERENCES
Bendesky,A.,andBargmann,C.I.(2011).Geneticcontributionstobehavioural
diversityatthegene-environmentinterface.Nat.Rev.Genet.12,809–820.
Adelmann,P.K.,andZajonc,R.B.(1989).Facialefferenceandtheexperience
ofemotion.Annu.Rev.Psychol.40,249–280. Bendesky,A.,Tsunozaki,M.,Rockman,M.V.,Kruglyak,L.,andBargmann,
C.I.(2011).Catecholaminereceptorpolymorphismsaffectdecision-making
Adolphs,R.(2008).Fear,faces,andthehumanamygdala.Curr.Opin.Neuro- inC.elegans.Nature472,313–318.
biol.18,166–172.
Bernard,C.(1878–1879).Leconssurlesphenomenesdelaviecommunsaux
Amaral,D.G.(2003).Theamygdala,socialbehavior,anddangerdetection. animausetauxvegetaux(Paris:Bailliere).
Ann.NYAcad.Sci.1000,337–347.
Berridge, K.C. (1999). Pleasure, pain, desire, and dread: hidden core
Antoniadis,E.A.,Winslow,J.T.,Davis,M.,andAmaral,D.G.(2007).Roleofthe processes of emotion. In Well-Being, D. Kahnemann, E. Diener, and N.
primateamygdalainfear-potentiatedstartle:effectsofchroniclesionsinthe Schwarz,eds.(NewYork:RussellSageFoundation).
rhesusmonkey.J.Neurosci.27,7386–7396.
Berridge,K.C.(2004).Motivationconceptsinbehavioralneuroscience.Phys-
Arnold,M.B.(1960).EmotionandPersonality(NewYork:ColumbiaUniversity iol.Behav.81,179–209.
Press).
Berridge,K.C.(2007).Thedebateoverdopamine’sroleinreward:thecasefor
Arnsten,A.F.,andLi,B.M.(2005).Neurobiologyofexecutivefunctions:cate- incentivesalience.Psychopharmacology(Berl.)191,391–431.
cholamine influences on prefrontal cortical functions. Biol. Psychiatry 57,
1377–1384. Berridge,K.C.(2009).‘Liking’and‘wanting’foodrewards:brainsubstrates
androlesineatingdisorders.Physiol.Behav.97,537–550.
Aston-Jones,G.(2005).Brainstructuresandreceptorsinvolvedinalertness.
SleepMed.6(Suppl1),S3–S7. Berridge,K.C.,andRobinson,T.E.(1998).Whatistheroleofdopaminein
reward:hedonicimpact,rewardlearning,orincentivesalience?BrainRes.
Aston-Jones, G., and Bloom, F.E. (1981). Norepinephrine-containing locus BrainRes.Rev.28,309–369.
coeruleusneuronsinbehavingratsexhibit pronouncedresponses tonon-
noxiousenvironmentalstimuli.J.Neurosci.1,887–900. Bindra,D.(1968).Neuropsychologicalinterpretationoftheeffectsofdriveand
incentive-motivationongeneralactivityandinstrumentalbehavior.Psychol.
Aston-Jones,G.,Shipley,M.T.,Chouvet,G.,Ennis,M.,vanBockstaele,E., Rev.75,1–22.
Pieribone,V.,Shiekhattar,R.,Akaoka,H.,Drolet,G.,Astier,B.,etal.(1991).
Afferentregulationoflocuscoeruleusneurons:anatomy,physiologyandphar- Bindra,D.(1969).Aunfiedinterpretationofemotionandmotivation.Ann.NY
macology.Prog.BrainRes.88,47–75. Acad.Sci.159,1071–1083.
668 Neuron73,February23,2012ª2012ElsevierInc.

Neuron
Perspective
Blanchard,D.C.,andBlanchard,R.J.(1972).Innateandconditionedreactions Casey,B.J.,Ruberry,E.J.,Libby,V.,Glatt,C.E.,Hare,T.,Soliman,F.,Duhoux,
tothreatinratswithamygdaloidlesions.J.Comp.Physiol.Psychol.81,281– S.,Frielingsdorf,H.,andTottenham,N.(2011).Transitionalandtranslational
290. studiesofriskforanxiety.Depress.Anxiety28,18–28.
Blanchard,D.C.,Blanchard,R.J.,andRodgers,R.J.(1990).Pharmacological Chi,C.C.,andFlynn,J.P.(1971).Neuralpathwaysassociatedwithhypothal-
andneuralcontrolofanti-predatordefenseintherat.Aggress.Behav.16, amicallyelicitedattachbehaviorincats.Science171,703–706.
165–175.
Choi,J.S.,andBrown,T.H.(2003).Centralamygdalalesionsblockultrasonic
Blanchard,D.C.,Li,C.I.,Hubbard,D.,Markham,C.M.,Yang,M.,Takahashi, vocalization and freezing as conditional but not unconditional responses.
L.K.,andBlanchard,R.J.(2003).Dorsalpremammillarynucleusdifferentially J.Neurosci.23,8713–8721.
modulates defensive behaviors induced by different threat stimuli in rats.
Neurosci.Lett.345,145–148. Choi,G.B.,Dong,H.W.,Murphy,A.J.,Valenzuela,D.M.,Yancopoulos,G.D.,
Swanson,L.W.,andAnderson,D.J.(2005).Lhx6delineatesapathwaymedi-
Blaustein,J.D.(2008).Neuroendocrineregulationoffemininesexualbehavior: atinginnatereproductivebehaviorsfromtheamygdalatothehypothalamus.
lessonsfromrodentmodelsandthoughtsabouthumans.Annu.Rev.Psychol. Neuron46,647–660.
59,93–118.
Cofer,C.N.(1972).MotivationandEmotion(Glenview,IL:Scott,Foresman).
Bolles,R.C.,andFanselow,M.S.(1980).Aperceptual-defensive-recuperative
modeloffearandpain.Behav.BrainSci.3,291–323. Cofer,C.,andAppley,M.(1964).Motivation,TheoryandResearch(NewYork:
JohnWiley&Sons,Inc.).
Bordi,F.,andLeDoux,J.(1992).Sensorytuningbeyondthesensorysystem:
an initial analysis ofauditory response properties of neurons in the lateral Cohen,D.H.(1974).Theneuralpathwaysandinformationalflowmediating
amygdaloid nucleus and overlying areas of the striatum. J. Neurosci. 12, aconditionedautonomicresponse.InLimbicandAutonomicNervousSystem
2493–2503. Research,L.V.DiCara,ed.(NewYork:PlenumPress),pp.223–275.
Bowlby,J.(1969).Attachment,Volume1,AttachmentandLoss(NewYork: Conover,K.L.,andShizgal,P.(1994).Differentialeffectsofpostingestivefeed-
BasicBooks). backontherewardvalueofsucroseandlateralhypothalamicstimulationin
rats.Behav.Neurosci.108,559–572.
Braak,E.(1980).OnthestructureofIIIab-pyramidalcellsinthehumanisocor-
tex.AGolgiandelectronmicroscopicalstudywithspecialemphasisonthe Coons,E.E.,andWhite,H.A.(1977).Tonicpropertiesoforosensationandthe
proximalaxonsegment.J.Hirnforsch.21,437–442. modulationofintracranialself-stimulation:theCNSweightingofexternaland
internalfactorsgoverningreward.Ann.NYAcad.Sci.290,158–179.
Brown,S.M.,andHariri,A.R.(2006).Neuroimagingstudiesofserotoningene
Corbit,L.H.,andBalleine,B.W.(2005).Doubledissociationofbasolateraland
polymorphisms:exploringtheinterplayofgenes,brain,andbehavior.Cogn.
central amygdala lesions on the general and outcome-specific forms of
Affect.Behav.Neurosci.6,44–52.
pavlovian-instrumentaltransfer.J.Neurosci.25,962–970.
Bruce,L.L.,andNeary,T.J.(1995).Thelimbicsystemoftetrapods:acompar-
Cousens, G., and Otto, T. (1998). Both pre- and posttraining excitotoxic
ativeanalysisofcorticalandamygdalarpopulations.BrainBehav.Evol.46,
lesionsofthebasolateralamygdalaabolishtheexpressionofolfactoryand
224–234.
contextualfearconditioning.Behav.Neurosci.112,1092–1103.
Bu¨chel,C.,andDolan,R.J.(2000).Classicalfearconditioninginfunctional
Crick,F.,andKoch,C.(1990).Towardaneurobiologicaltheoryofconscious-
neuroimaging.Curr.Opin.Neurobiol.10,219–223.
ness.Neurosciences2,263–275.
Buck,R.(1980).Nonverbalbehaviorandthetheoryofemotion:thefacialfeed-
Crick, F.C., andKoch, C. (2004).AFramework forConsciousness. In The
backhypothesis.J.Pers.Soc.Psychol.38,811–824.
Cognitive Neurosciences, Third Edition, M.S. Gazzaniga, ed. (Cambridge:
MITPress),pp.1133–1143.
Butler,A.B.,andHodos,W.(2005).ComparativeVertebrateNeuroanatomy:
EvolutionandAdaptation,SecondEdition(Hoboken:JohnWiley&Sons,Inc.).
Critchley,H.D.,Wiens,S.,Rotshtein,P.,Ohman,A.,andDolan,R.J.(2004).Neural
systemssupportinginteroceptiveawareness.Nat.Neurosci.7,189–195.
Cain,C.K.,andLeDoux,J.E.(2007).Escapefromfear:adetailedbehavioral
analysis of two atypical responses reinforced by CS termination. J. Exp. Damasio,A.(1994).Descarte’serror:Emotion,reason,andthehumanbrain
Psychol.Anim.Behav.Process.33,451–463. (NewYork:Gosset/Putnam).
Canli, T., Sivers, H., Whitfield, S.L., Gotlib, I.H., and Gabrieli, J.D. (2002). Damasio,A.R.(1999).Thefeelingofwhathappens:Bodyandemotioninthe
Amygdalaresponsetohappyfacesasafunctionofextraversion.Science makingofconsciousness(NewYork:HarcourtBrace).
296,2191.
Damasio,A.(2003).Feelingsofemotionandtheself.Ann.NYAcad.Sci.1001,
Cannon,W.B.(1927).TheJames-Langetheoryofemotions:acriticalexami- 253–261.
nationandanalternativetheory.Am.J.Psychol.39,106–124.
Damasio,A.R.,Grabowski,T.J.,Bechara,A.,Damasio,H.,Ponto,L.L.,Parvizi,
Cannon,W.B.(1929).Bodilychangesinpain,hunger,fear,andrage(New J.,andHichwa,R.D.(2000).Subcorticalandcorticalbrainactivityduringthe
York:Appleton). feelingofself-generatedemotions.Nat.Neurosci.3,1049–1056.
Cannon,W.B.(1931).AgaintheJames-Langeandthethalamictheoriesof Darwin, C. (1872). The expression of the emotions in man and animals
emotion.Psychol.Rev.38,281–295. (London:FontanaPress).
Canteras,N.S.(2002).Themedialhypothalamicdefensivesystem:hodologi- Davidson, R.J. (1993). Cerebral asymmetry and emotion: Conceptual and
cal organization and functional implications. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. methodologicalconundrums.Cogn.Emotion7,115–138.
71,481–491.
Davies, D.C., Martı´nez-Garcı´a, F., Lanuza, E., and Novejarque, A. (2002).
Canteras,N.S.,Resstel,L.B.,Bertoglio,L.J.,Carobrez,Ade.P.,andGuimar- Striato-amygdaloidtransitionarealesionsreducethedurationoftonicimmo-
a˜es,F.S.(2010).Neuroanatomyofanxiety.CurrTopBehavNeurosci2,77–96. bilityinthelizardPodarcishispanica.BrainRes.Bull.57,537–541.
Cardinal,R.N.,Parkinson,J.A.,Hall,J.,andEveritt,B.J.(2002).Emotionand Davis,M.(1992).Theroleoftheamygdalainconditionedfear.InTheAmyg-
motivation:theroleoftheamygdala,ventralstriatum,andprefrontalcortex. dala:NeurobiologicalAspectsofEmotion,Memory,andMentalDysfunction,
Neurosci.Biobehav.Rev.26,321–352. J.P.Aggleton,ed.(NY:Wiley-Liss,Inc.),pp.255–306.
Carew,T.J.,andSutton,M.A.(2001).Molecularsteppingstonesinmemory Davis,M.,andWhalen,P.J.(2001).Theamygdala: vigilance andemotion.
consolidation.Nat.Neurosci.4,769–771. Mol.Psychiatry6,13–34.
Neuron73,February23,2012ª2012ElsevierInc. 669

Neuron
Perspective
Davis,M.,Walker,D.L.,andLee,Y.(1997).Amygdalaandbednucleusofthe Everitt,B.J.,Parkinson,J.A.,Olmstead,M.C.,Arroyo,M.,Robledo,P.,and
striaterminalis:differentialrolesinfearandanxietymeasuredwiththeacoustic Robbins, T.W. (1999). Associative processes in addiction and reward.
startlereflex.Philos.Trans.R.Soc.Lond.BBiol.Sci.352,1675–1687. Theroleofamygdala-ventralstriatalsubsystems.Ann.NYAcad.Sci.877,
412–438.
Davis, F.C., Somerville, L.H., Ruberry, E.J., Berry, A.B., Shin, L.M., and
Whalen,P.J.(2011).Ataleoftwonegatives:differentialmemorymodulation Everitt, B.J., Cardinal, R.N., Parkinson, J.A., and Robbins, T.W. (2003).
bythreat-relatedfacialexpressions.Emotion11,647–655. Appetitive behavior: impact of amygdala-dependent mechanisms of
emotionallearning.Ann.NYAcad.Sci.985,233–250.
deOca,B.M.,andFanselow,M.S.(2004).Amygdalaandperiaqueductalgray
lesions only partially attenuate unconditional defensive responses in rats Fanselow,M.S.(1994).Neuralorganizationofthedefensivebehaviorsystem
exposedtoacat.Integr.Physiol.Behav.Sci.39,318–333. responsibleforfear.Psychon.Bull.Rev.1,429–438.
DeOca,B.M.,DeCola,J.P.,Maren,S.,andFanselow,M.S.(1998).Distinct Fanselow,M.S.,andPoulos,A.M.(2005).Theneuroscienceofmammalian
regionsoftheperiaqueductalgrayareinvolvedintheacquisitionandexpres- associativelearning.Annu.Rev.Psychol.56,207–234.
sionofdefensiveresponses.J.Neurosci.18,3426–3432.
Ferris,C.F.,Stolberg,T.,Kulkarni,P.,Murugavel,M.,Blanchard,R.,Blan-
deOca,B.M.,Minor,T.R.,andFanselow,M.S.(2007).Briefflighttoafamiliar chard,D.C.,Febo,M.,Brevard,M.,andSimon,N.G.(2008).Imagingtheneural
enclosureinresponsetoaconditionalstimulusinrats.J.Gen.Psychol.134, circuitryandchemicalcontrolofaggressivemotivation.BMCNeurosci.9,111.
153–172.
Fitzsimons,J.T.(1979).Thephysiologyofthirstandsodiumappetite.Monogr.
Dehaene, S., and Changeux, J.-P. (2004). Neural Mechanisms for Access
Physiol.Soc.35,1–572.
toConsciousness.InTheCognitiveNeurosciences,ThirdEdition,M.S.Gazza-
niga,ed.(Cambridge:MITPress),pp.1145–1157.
Flynn, J.P. (1967). The neural basis of aggression in cats. In Biology and
Behavior:NeurophysiologyandEmotion,D.G.Glass,ed.(NewYork:Rockef-
Dickson,B.J.(2008).Wiredforsex:theneurobiologyofDrosophilamating
ellerUniversityPressandRussellSageFoundation),pp.40–60.
decisions.Science322,904–909.
Foote,S.L.,Bloom,F.E.,andAston-Jones,G.(1983).Nucleuslocusceruleus:
Dielenberg,R.A.,Hunt,G.E.,andMcGregor,I.S.(2001).‘‘Whenaratsmells
newevidenceofanatomicalandphysiologicalspecificity.Physiol.Rev.63,
acat’’:thedistributionofFosimmunoreactivityinratbrainfollowingexposure
844–914.
toapredatoryodor.Neuroscience104,1085–1097.
Dixon,B.A.(2001).AnimalEmotion.EthicsEnviron.6,22–30. Foote,S.L.,Berridge,C.W.,Adams,L.M.,andPineda,J.A.(1991).Electro-
physiologicalevidencefortheinvolvementofthelocuscoeruleusinalerting,
Dudai,Y.(1988).Neurogeneticdissectionoflearningandshort-termmemory orienting,andattending.Prog.BrainRes.88,521–532.
inDrosophila.Annu.Rev.Neurosci.11,537–563.
Frijda,N.(1986).TheEmotions(Cambridge:CambridgeUniversityPress).
Duffy, E. (1934). Emotion: an example of the need for reorientation in
psychology.Psychol.Rev.41,184–198. Frith, C.D. (2008). The social functions of consciousness. In Frontiers of
Consciousness:Chichelelectures,L.WeiskrantzandM.Davies,eds.(Oxford:
Duffy,E.(1941).Anexplanationof‘‘emotional’’phemomenawithouttheuseof OxfordUniversityPress),pp.225–244.
theconcept‘‘emotion’’.J.Gen.Psychol.25,283–293.
Frith,C.,andDolan,R.(1996).Theroleoftheprefrontalcortexinhighercogni-
Ekman,P.(1972)UniversalsandCulturalDifferencesinFacialExpressions tivefunctions.BrainRes.Cogn.BrainRes.5,175–181.
of Emotions. In: Nebraska Symposium on Motivation, 1971 (Cole J, ed),
pp207-283.Lincoln,Nebraska:UniversityofNebraskaPress. Frith,C.,Perry,R.,andLumer,E.(1999).Theneuralcorrelatesofconscious
experience: an experimental framework. Trends Cogn. Sci. (Regul. Ed.) 3,
Ekman, P. (1980). Biological and cultural contributions to body and facial 105–114.
movementintheexpressionofemotions.InExplainingEmotions,A.O.Rorty,
ed.(Berkeley:UniversityofCaliforniaPress). Fusar-Poli,P.,Placentino,A.,Carletti,F.,Landi,P.,Allen,P.,Surguladze,S.,
Benedetti, F., Abbamonte, M., Gasparotti, R., Barale, F., et al. (2009).
Ekman, P. (1984). Expression and nature of emotion. In Approaches Functionalatlasofemotionalfacesprocessing:avoxel-basedmeta-analysis
to Emotion, K. Scherer and P. Ekman, eds. (Hillsdale, NJ: Earlbaum), of105functionalmagneticresonanceimagingstudies.J.PsychiatryNeurosci.
pp.319–343. 34,418–432.
Ekman,P.(1992).Anargumentforbasicemotions.Cogn.Emotion6,169–200. Gallagher, M., and Holland, P.C. (1994). The amygdala complex: multiple
roles in associative learningand attention. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91,
Ekman,P.(1999a).BasicEmotions.InHandbookofCognitionandEmotion,T.
11771–11776.
Dalgleish and M. Power, eds. (Chichester: John Wiley and Sons, Co.),
pp.45–60.
Gallistel,R.(1980).Theorganizationofaction:Anewsynthesis(Hillsdale,NJ:
Erlbaum).
Ekman,P.(1999b).AnnotatedupdateofCharlesDarwin’s‘‘TheExpressionof
theEmotionsinManandAnimals.’’(NewYork:Harpercollins).
Garcia,J.,McGowan,B.K.,Ervin,F.R.,andKoelling,R.A.(1968).Cues:their
relativeeffectivenessasafunctionofthereinforcer.Science160,794–795.
Ekman, P., and Davidson, R. (1994). The nature of emotion: fundamental
questions(NewYork:OxfordUniversityPress).
Garrity,P.A.,Goodman,M.B.,Samuel,A.D.,andSengupta,P.(2010).Running
Elliot,A.,andChurch,M.(1997).Ahierarchicalmodelofapproachmotivation hot and cold: behavioral strategies, neural circuits, and the molecular
andavoidanceachievementmotivation.J.Pers.Soc.Psychol.72,218–232. machinery for thermotaxis in C. elegans and Drosophila. Genes Dev. 24,
2365–2382.
Ellsworth,P.C.(1994).WilliamJamesandemotion:isacenturyoffameworth
acenturyofmisunderstanding?Psychol.Rev.101,222–229. Glanzman,D.L.(2010).Commonmechanismsofsynapticplasticityinverte-
bratesandinvertebrates.Curr.Biol.20,R31–R36.
Elmquist, J.K., Coppari, R., Balthasar, N., Ichinose, M., and Lowell, B.B.
(2005). Identifying hypothalamic pathways controlling food intake, body Glickman,S.E.,andSchiff,B.B.(1967).Abiologicaltheoryofreinforcement.
weight,andglucosehomeostasis.J.Comp.Neurol.493,63–71. Psychol.Rev.74,81–109.
Estes,W.K.,andSkinner,B.F.(1941).Somequantitativepropertiesofanxiety. Glimcher,P.W.(2003).Decisions,Uncertainty,andtheBrain:Thescienceof
J.Exp.Psychol.29,390–400. neuroeconomics(Cambridge:MITPress).
Everitt,B.J.,andRobbins,T.W.(2005).Neuralsystemsofreinforcementfor Glimcher,P.W.(2011).Understandingdopamineandreinforcementlearning:
drug addiction: from actions to habits to compulsion. Nat. Neurosci. 8, the dopamine reward prediction error hypothesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
1481–1489. USA108(Suppl3),15647–15654.
670 Neuron73,February23,2012ª2012ElsevierInc.

Neuron
Perspective
Gray,J.A.(1982).TheNeuropsychologyofAnxiety(NewYork:OxfordUniver- Johnson,A.K.(2007).Thesensorypsychobiologyofthirstandsaltappetite.
sityPress). Med.Sci.SportsExerc.39,1388–1400.
Gray,J.A.(1987).ThePsychologyofFearandStress(NewYork:Cambridge Johnson, A.W., Gallagher, M., and Holland, P.C. (2009). The basolateral
UniversityPress). amygdala is critical to the expression of pavlovian and instrumental
outcome-specificreinforcerdevaluationeffects.J.Neurosci.29,696–704.
Gray,T.S.(1993).AmygdaloidCRFpathways.Roleinautonomic,neuroendo-
crine,andbehavioralresponsestostress.Ann.NYAcad.Sci.697,53–60. Johnson-Laird,P.N.,andOatley,K.(1989).Thelanguageofemotions:Ananal-
ysisofasemanticfield.Cogn.Emotion3,81–123.
Graybiel,A.(1976).Input-outputanatomyofthebasalganglia(Toronto,Can-
ada:LectureattheSocietyforNeuroscience). Jones,B.E.(2003).Arousalsystems.Front.Biosci.8,s438–s451.
Griffiths,P.E.(1997).WhatEmotionsReallyAre:Theproblemofpsychological Jouvet, M. (1969). Biogenic amines and the states of sleep. Science 163,
categories(Chicago:UniversityofChicagoPress). 32–41.
Griffiths, P.E. (2004). Is emotion a natural kind? In Thinking about feeling: Jouvet,M.(1999).Sleepandserotonin:anunfinishedstory.Neuropsycho-
Contemporaryphilosophersonemotions,R.C.Solomon,ed.(Oxford:Oxford
pharmacology21(2,Suppl),24S–27S.
UniversityPress),pp.233–249.
Kagan,J.(2007).Whatisemotion?history,measures,andmeanings(New
Hamann,S.B.,Ely,T.D.,Hoffman,J.M.,andKilts,C.D.(2002).Ecstasyand Haven:YaleUniversityPress).
agony:activationofthehumanamygdalainpositiveandnegativeemotion.
Kalin,N.H.,Shelton,S.E.,Davidson,R.J.,andKelley,A.E.(2001).Theprimate
Psychol.Sci.13,135–141.
amygdala mediates acute fear but not the behavioral and physiological
Hammond,L.J.(1970).Conditionalemotionalstates.InPhysiologicalCorre- componentsofanxioustemperament.J.Neurosci.21,2067–2074.
latesofEmotion,P.Black,ed.(NewYork:AcademicPress).
Kalin,N.H.,Shelton,S.E.,andDavidson,R.J.(2004).Theroleofthecentral
Hasselmo,M.E.(1995).Neuromodulationandcorticalfunction:modelingthe nucleusoftheamygdalainmediatingfearandanxietyintheprimate.J.Neuro-
physiologicalbasisofbehavior.Behav.BrainRes.67,1–27. sci.24,5506–5515.
Kandel, E.R. (2001). The molecular biology of memory storage: a dialog
Haubensak,W.,Kunwar,P.S.,Cai,H.,Ciocchi,S.,Wall,N.R.,Ponnusamy,R.,
betweengenesandsynapses.Biosci.Rep.21,565–611.
Biag,J.,Dong,H.W.,Deisseroth,K.,Callaway,E.M.,etal.(2010).Genetic
dissectionofanamygdalamicrocircuitthatgatesconditionedfear.Nature
Kapp,B.S.,Whalen,P.J.,Supple,W.F.,andPascoe,J.P.(1992).Amygdaloid
468,270–276.
contributionstoconditionedarousalandsensoryinformationprocessing.In
The Amygdala: Neurobiological Aspects of Emotion, Memory, and Mental
Hawkins,R.D.,Kandel,E.R.,andBailey,C.H.(2006).Molecularmechanisms
Dysfunction,J.P.Aggleton,ed.(NewYork:Wiley-Liss),pp.229–254.
ofmemorystorageinAplysia.Biol.Bull.210,174–191.
Kapp,B.S.,Supple,W.F.,Jr.,andWhalen,P.J.(1994).Effectsofelectrical
Hebb,D.O.(1949).TheOrganizationofBehavior(NewYork:JohnWileyand
stimulationoftheamygdaloidcentralnucleusonneocorticalarousalinthe
Sons).
rabbit.Behav.Neurosci.108,81–93.
Hess,W.R.(1954).Functionalorganizationofthediencephalon(NewYork:
Kelley, A.E. (2004). Ventral striatal control of appetitive motivation: role in
GruneandStratton).
ingestive behavior and reward-related learning. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.
27,765–776.
Holland,P.C.,andGallagher,M.(2004).Amygdala-frontalinteractionsand
rewardexpectancy.Curr.Opin.Neurobiol.14,148–155.
Killcross,A.S.,andRobbins,T.W.(1993).Differentialeffectsofintra-accum-
bensandsystemicamphetamineonlatentinhibitionusinganon-baseline,
Holland,P.C.,andRescorla,R.A.(1975).Second-orderconditioningwithfood
within-subject conditioned suppression paradigm. Psychopharmacology
unconditionedstimulus.J.Comp.Physiol.Psychol.88,459–467.
(Berl.)110,479–489.
Hull,C.L.(1943).Principlesofbehavior(NewYork:Appleton-Century-Crofts).
KitayamaS.andMarkusH.R.,eds.(1994).Emotionandculture:Empirical
studiesofmutualinfluence(Washington,DC:AmericanPsychologicalAssoci-
Hurley,L.M.,Devilbiss,D.M.,andWaterhouse,B.D.(2004).Amatteroffocus:
ation).
monoaminergic modulation of stimulus coding in mammalian sensory
networks.Curr.Opin.Neurobiol.14,488–495. Koob,G.F.(2009).Brainstresssystemsintheamygdalaandaddiction.Brain
Res.1293,61–75.
Hyman,S.E.,Malenka,R.C.,andNestler,E.J.(2006).Neuralmechanismsof
addiction:theroleofreward-relatedlearningandmemory.Annu.Rev.Neuro- LaBar, K.S., and Cabeza, R. (2006). Cognitive neuroscience of emotional
sci.29,565–598. memory.Nat.Rev.Neurosci.7,54–64.
Ikemoto,S.,andPanksepp,J.(1999).Theroleofnucleusaccumbensdopa- Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things: What Categories
mineinmotivatedbehavior:aunifyinginterpretationwithspecialreference Revealaboutthemind(Chicago:TheUniversityofChicagoPress).
toreward-seeking.BrainRes.BrainRes.Rev.31,6–41.
Lamprecht,R.,andDudai,Y.(2000).Theamygdalainconditionedtasteaver-
Izard,C.E.(1992).Basicemotions,relationsamongemotions,andemotion- sion:it’sthere,butwhere?InTheAmygdala,J.Aggleton,ed.(Oxford:Oxford
cognitionrelations.Psychol.Rev.99,561–565. U.Press).
Izard,C.E.(2007).Basicemotions,naturalkinds,emotionschemas,andanew Lane,R.D.,Chua,P.M.,andDolan,R.J.(1999).Commoneffectsofemotional
paradigm.Perspect.Psychol.Sci.2,260–280. valence,arousalandattentiononneuralactivationduringvisualprocessingof
pictures.Neuropsychologia37,989–997.
Jacobs, B.L., Wilkinson, L.O., and Fornal, C.A. (1990). The role of brain
serotonin. A neurophysiologic perspective. Neuropsychopharmacology 3, Lang, P.J. (1994). The varieties of emotional experience: a meditation on
473–479. James-Langetheory.Psychol.Rev.101,211–221.
James,W.(1884).Whatisanemotion?Mind9,188–205. Lang,P.J.,andDavis,M.(2006).Emotion,motivation,andthebrain:reflex
foundationsinanimalandhumanresearch.Prog.BrainRes.156,3–29.
Jarymowicz,M.(2009).Emotionsasevaluativeprocessesfromprimaryaffects
toappraisalsbasedondeliberativethinking.InClosertoemotions,A.Blachnio Lang,P.J.,Bradley,M.M.,andCuthbert,B.N.(1990).Emotion,attention,and
andA.Przepiorka,eds.(Lublin:WydawnictwoKUL),pp.55–72. thestartlereflex.Psychol.Rev.97,377–395.
Johansen,J.P.,Cain,C.K.,Ostroff,L.E.,andLeDoux,J.E.(2011).Molecular Lange,C.G.(1885/1922).Theemotions.InTheEmotions,E.Dunlap,ed.(Bal-
mechanismsoffearlearningandmemory.Cell147,509–524. timore:WilliamsandWilkins).
Neuron73,February23,2012ª2012ElsevierInc. 671

Neuron
Perspective
Lashley,K.S.(1938).Experimentalanalysisofinstinctivebehavior.Psychol. Luo, Q., Holroyd, T., Jones, M., Hendler, T., and Blair, J. (2007). Neural
Rev.45,445–471. dynamicsforfacialthreatprocessingasrevealedbygammabandsynchroni-
zationusingMEG.Neuroimage34,839–847.
La´zaro-Mun˜oz,G.,LeDoux,J.E.,andCain,C.K.(2010).Sidmaninstrumental
avoidanceinitiallydependsonlateralandbasalamygdalaandisconstrained Lyons,W.(1980).Emotion(Cambridge:CambridgeUniversityPress).
by central amygdala-mediated Pavlovian processes. Biol. Psychiatry 67,
1120–1127. MacLean,P.D.(1949).Psychosomaticdiseaseandthevisceralbrain;recent
developmentsbearing onthePapeztheory ofemotion. Psychosom. Med.
Lazarus,R.S.(1981).Acognitivist’sreplytoZajonconemotionandcognition. 11,338–353.
Am.Psychol.36,222–223.
MacLean,P.D.(1952).Somepsychiatricimplicationsofphysiologicalstudies
Lazarus,R.S.(1991a).Cognitionandmotivationinemotion.Am.Psychol.46, onfrontotemporalportionoflimbicsystem(visceralbrain).Electroencepha-
352–367. logr.Clin.Neurophysiol.4,407–418.
Lazarus,R.S.(1991b).EmotionandAdaptation(NewYork:OxfordUniversity Macnab,R.M.,andKoshland,D.E.,Jr.(1972).Thegradient-sensingmecha-
Press). nisminbacterialchemotaxis.Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA69,2509–2512.
Mandler,G.(1975).MindandEmotion(NewYork:Wiley).
Lazarus,R.S.,andFolkman,S.(1984).Stress,AppraisalandCoping(New
York:Springer).
Manning,A.(1967).Anintroductiontoanimalbehaviour(Reading,MA:Addi-
son-Wesley).
Lebestky,T.,Chang,J.S.,Dankert,H.,Zelnik,L.,Kim,Y.C.,Han,K.A.,Wolf,
F.W.,Perona,P.,andAnderson,D.J.(2009).Twodifferentformsofarousal
Maren, S. (2001). Neurobiology of Pavlovian fear conditioning. Annu. Rev.
inDrosophilaareoppositelyregulatedbythedopamineD1receptorortholog
Neurosci.24,897–931.
DopRviadistinctneuralcircuits.Neuron64,522–536.
Maren,S.,andQuirk,G.J.(2004).Neuronalsignallingoffearmemory.Nat.
LeDoux,J.E.(1992).EmotionandtheAmygdala.InTheAmygdala:Neurobio- Rev.Neurosci.5,844–852.
logicalAspectsofEmotion,Memory,andMentalDysfunction,J.P.Aggleton,
ed.(NewYork:Wiley-Liss,Inc.),pp.339–351. Margulies, C., Tully, T., and Dubnau, J. (2005). Deconstructing memory in
Drosophila.Curr.Biol.15,R700–R713.
LeDoux,J.E.(1995).Seting‘‘Stress’’intoMotion.InNeurobiologicalandClin-
icalConsequencesofStress:fromNormalAdaptationtoPTSD,M.J.Fried- Markham,C.M.,Blanchard,D.C.,Canteras,N.S.,Cuyno,C.D.,andBlanchard,
man, D.S. Charney, and A.Y. Deutch, eds. (New York: Raven Press), R.J.(2004).Modulationofpredatoryodorprocessingfollowinglesionstothe
pp.125–134. dorsalpremammillarynucleus.Neurosci.Lett.372,22–26.
LeDoux,J.E.(1996).TheEmotionalBrain(NewYork:SimonandSchuster). Marks,I.(1987).Fears,Phobias,andRituals:Panic,AnxietyandTheirDisor-
ders(NewYork:OxfordUniversityPress).
LeDoux,J.E.(2000).Emotioncircuitsinthebrain.Annu.Rev.Neurosci.23,
155–184. Martı´nez-Garc´ıa,F.,Martı´nez-Marcos,A.,andLanuza,E.(2002).Thepallial
amygdalaofamniotevertebrates:evolutionoftheconcept,evolutionofthe
LeDoux,J.E.(2002).SynapticSelf:Howourbrainsbecomewhoweare(New structure.BrainRes.Bull.57,463–469.
York:Viking).
Masson,J.M.,andMcCarthy,S.(1996).Whenelephantsweep:Theemotional
LeDoux,J.E.(2008).Emotionalcolourationofconsciousness:howfeelings livesofanimals(NewYork:Delacorte).
comeabout.InFrontiersofConsciousness:ChicheleLectures,L.Weiskrantz
andM.Davies,eds.(Oxford:OxfordUniversityPress),pp.69–130. Maturana,H.,andVarela,F.(1987).Thetreeofknowledge:Thebiological
rootsofhumanunderstanding(Boston:NewScienceLibrary).
LeDoux,J.E.(2012).EvolutionofhumanemotionAviewthroughfear.Prog.
BrainRes.195,431–442. McClelland,D.,Atkinson,J.,Clark,R.,andLowell,E.(1953).Theachievement
motive(NewYork:IrvingtonPublishers).
Leventhal,H.,andScherer,K.(1987).Therelationshipofemotiontocognition:
afunctionalapproachtoasemanticcontroversy.Cogn.Emotion1,3–28. McEwen,B.S.(2009).Thebrainisthecentralorganofstressandadaptation.
Neuroimage47,911–913.
Liddell, B.J., Brown, K.J., Kemp, A.H., Barton, M.J., Das, P., Peduto, A.,
McEwen,B.S.,Eiland,L.,Hunter,R.G.,andMiller,M.M.(2012).Stressand
Gordon,E.,andWilliams,L.M.(2005).Adirectbrainstem-amygdala-cortical
anxiety:structuralplasticityandepigeneticregulationasaconsequenceof
‘alarm’systemforsubliminalsignalsoffear.Neuroimage24,235–243.
stress.Neuropharmacology62,3–12.
Lima,S.L.,andDill,L.M.(1990).Behavioraldecisionmadeundertheriskof
McGaugh, J.L. (2000). Memory—a century of consolidation. Science 287,
predation:areviewandprospectus.Can.J.Zool.68,619–640.
248–251.
Lin,D.,Boyle,M.P.,Dollar,P.,Lee,H.,Lein,E.S.,Perona,P.,andAnderson,
McGaugh,J.L.(2003).MemoryandEmotion:Themakingoflastingmemories
D.J.(2011).Functionalidentificationofanaggressionlocusinthemousehypo-
(London:TheOrionPublishingGroup).
thalamus.Nature470,221–226.
McGrath, P.T., Rockman, M.V., Zimmer, M., Jang, H., Macosko, E.Z.,
Lindsley,D.B.(1951).Emotions.InHandbookofExperimentalPsychology, Kruglyak,L.,andBargmann,C.I.(2009).Quantitativemappingofadigenic
S.S.Stevens,ed.(NewYork:Wiley),pp.473–516. behavioraltraitimplicatesglobinvariationinC.eleganssensorybehaviors.
Neuron61,692–699.
Litvin,Y.,Blanchard,D.C.,andBlanchard,R.J.(2007).Rat22kHzultrasonic
vocalizationsasalarmcries.Behav.BrainRes.182,166–172. McNaughton,N.(1989).Biologyandemotion(Cambridge:CambridgeUniver-
sityPress).
Loewy,A.D.(1991).Forebrainnucleiinvolvedinautonomiccontrol.Prog.Brain
Res.87,253–268. Miller, N. (1944). Experimental studies of conflict. In Personality and the
Behavioral Disorders, N.S. Endler and J.M. Hunt, eds. (New York: Ronald
Lopez,H.S.,andBrown,A.M.(1992).Neuromodulation.Curr.Opin.Neurobiol. Press),pp.431–465.
2,317–322.
Mineka,S.,andO¨hman,A.(2002).Phobiasandpreparedness:theselective,
Lorenz,K.Z.(1981).TheFoundationsofEthology: The principalideas and automatic,andencapsulatednatureoffear.Biol.Psychiatry52,927–937.
discoveriesinanimalbehavior(NewYork:SimonandSchuster).
Mobbs, D., Marchant, J.L., Hassabis, D., Seymour, B., Tan, G., Gray, M.,
Lucy,J.A.(1997).LinguisticRelativity.Annu.Rev.Anthropol.26,291–312. Petrovic,P.,Dolan,R.J.,andFrith,C.D.(2009).Fromthreattofear:theneural
672 Neuron73,February23,2012ª2012ElsevierInc.

Neuron
Perspective
organizationofdefensivefearsystemsinhumans.J.Neurosci.29,12236– O¨hman,A.(1986).Facethebeastandfeartheface:animalandsocialfears
12243. as prototypes for evolutionary analyses of emotion. Psychophysiology 23,
123–145.
Mogenson,G.J.,Jones,D.L.,andYim,C.Y.(1980).Frommotivationtoaction:
functionalinterfacebetweenthelimbicsystemandthemotorsystem.Prog. O¨hman,A.(2009).Ofsnakesandfaces:anevolutionaryperspectiveonthe
Neurobiol.14,69–97. psychologyoffear.Scand.J.Psychol.50,543–552.
Monsey,M.S.,Ota,K.T.,Akingbade,I.F.,Hong,E.S.,andSchafe,G.E.(2011). Olds,J.(1977).DrivesandReinforcement(NewYork:Raven).
Epigeneticalterationsarecriticalforfearmemoryconsolidationandsynaptic
plasticityinthelateralamygdala.PLoSONE6,e19958. Olds,J.,andMilner,P.(1954).Positivereinforcementproducedbyelectrical
stimulationofseptalareaandotherregionsofratbrain.J.Comp.Physiol.
Monti,J.M.,andJantos,H.(2008).Therolesofdopamineandserotonin,andof Psychol.47,419–427.
theirreceptors,inregulatingsleepandwaking.Prog.BrainRes.172,625–646.
Ono,T.,andNishijo,H.(1992).NeurophysiologicalBasisoftheKluver-Bucy
Morgan,C.T.(1943).PhysiologicalPsychology(NewYork:McGraw-Hill). Syndrome: Responses of Monkey Amygdaloid Neurons to Biologically
SignificantObjects.InTheAmygdala:NeurobiologicalAspectsofEmotion,
Morris, J.S., Ohman, A., and Dolan, R.J. (1999). A subcortical pathway to Memory, and Mental Dysfunction, J.P. Aggleton, ed. (New York: Wiley-
therightamygdalamediating‘‘unseen’’fear.Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA96, Liss,Inc.),pp.167–190.
1680–1685.
Oomura,Y.,Aou,S.,Koyama,Y.,Fujita,I.,andYoshimatsu,H.(1988).Central
Morrison, S.E., and Salzman, C.D. (2010). Re-valuing the amygdala. Curr. controlofsexualbehavior.BrainRes.Bull.20,863–870.
Opin.Neurobiol.20,221–230.
Ortony, A., and Turner, T.J. (1990). What’s basic about basic emotions?
Morton,G.J.,Cummings,D.E.,Baskin,D.G.,Barsh,G.S.,andSchwartz,M.W. Psychol.Rev.97,315–331.
(2006).Centralnervoussystemcontroloffoodintakeandbodyweight.Nature
443,289–295. Packard,M.G.,andKnowlton,B.J.(2002).Learningandmemoryfunctionsof
theBasalGanglia.Annu.Rev.Neurosci.25,563–593.
Moruzzi,G.,andMagoun,H.W.(1949).Brainstemreticularformationand
activationoftheEEG.Electroencephalogr.Clin.Neurophysiol.1,455–473. Pagani, J.H., and Rosen, J.B. (2009). The medial hypothalamic defensive
circuitand2,5-dihydro-2,4,5-trimethylthiazoline(TMT)inducedfear:compar-
Moscarello,J.M.,Ben-Shahar,O.,andEttenberg,A.(2009).Effectsoffood isonofelectrolyticandneurotoxiclesions.BrainRes.1286,133–146.
deprivationongoal-directedbehavior,spontaneouslocomotion,andc-Fos
immunoreactivityintheamygdala.Behav.BrainRes.197,9–15. Panksepp,J.(1982).Towardageneralpsychobiologicaltheoryofemotions.
Behav.BrainSci.5,407–467.
Motta, S.C., Goto, M., Gouveia, F.V., Baldo, M.V., Canteras, N.S., and
Swanson,L.W.(2009).Dissectingthebrain’sfearsystemrevealsthehypothal- Panksepp,J.(1998).AffectiveNeuroscience(NewYork:OxfordU.Press).
amusiscriticalforrespondinginsubordinateconspecificintruders.Proc.Natl.
Acad.Sci.USA106,4870–4875. Panksepp,J.(2000).Emotionsasnaturalkindswithinthemammalianbrain.In
HandbookofEmotions,SecondEdition,M.LewisandJ.M.Haviland-Jones,
Mowrer,O.H.(1960).Learningtheoryandbehavior(NewYork:Wiley). eds.(NewYork:TheGuilfordPress),pp.137–156.
Moyer,K.E.(1976).Thepsychobiologyofaggression(NewYork:Harper& Panksepp, J. (2005). Affective consciousness: Core emotional feelings in
Row). animalsandhumans.Conscious.Cogn.14,30–80.
Mozzachiodi,R.,andByrne,J.H.(2010).Morethansynapticplasticity:roleof Pare´, D., Quirk, G.J., and Ledoux, J.E. (2004). New vistas on amygdala
nonsynapticplasticityinlearningandmemory.TrendsNeurosci.33,17–26. networksinconditionedfear.J.Neurophysiol.92,1–9.
Nagel,T.(1974).Whatisitliketobeabat?Philos.Rev.83,4435–4450. Parkinson,J.A.,Olmstead,M.C.,Burns,L.H.,Robbins,T.W.,andEveritt,B.J.
(1999).Dissociationineffectsoflesionsofthenucleusaccumbenscoreand
Nakamura,K.,andMorrison,S.F.(2007).Centralefferentpathwaysmediating shellonappetitivepavlovianapproachbehaviorandthepotentiationofcondi-
skincooling-evokedsympatheticthermogenesisinbrownadiposetissue.Am. tionedreinforcementandlocomotoractivitybyD-amphetamine.J.Neurosci.
J.Physiol.Regul.Integr.Comp.Physiol.292,R127–R136. 19,2401–2411.
Nauta,W.J.H.,andKarten,H.J.(1970).Ageneralprofileofthevertebratebrain, Paton, J.J., Belova, M.A., Morrison, S.E., and Salzman, C.D. (2006). The
with sidelights on the ancestry of cerebral cortex. In The Neurosciences: primateamygdalarepresentsthepositiveandnegativevalueofvisualstimuli
SecondStudyProgram,F.O.Schmitt,ed.(NewYork:TheRockefellerUniver- duringlearning.Nature439,865–870.
sityPress),pp.7–26.
Pavesi,E.,Canteras,N.S.,andCarobrez,A.P.(2011).AcquisitionofPavlovian
Nesse, R. (1990). Evolutionary explanations of emotions. Hum. Nat. 1, fearconditioningusingb-adrenoceptoractivationofthedorsalpremammillary
261–289. nucleusasanunconditionedstimulustomimiclivepredator-threatexposure.
Neuropsychopharmacology36,926–939.
Nestler,E.J.(2004).Molecularmechanismsofdrugaddiction.Neuropharma-
cology47(Suppl1),24–32. Petrovich,G.D.(2011).Learningandthemotivationtoeat:forebraincircuitry.
Physiol.Behav.104,582–589.
Nieuwenhuys, R. (1985). Chemoarchitecture of the Brain (Berlin: Springer-
Verlag). Petrovich, G.D., Risold, P.Y., and Swanson, L.W. (1996). Organization of
projectionsfromthebasomedialnucleusoftheamygdala:aPHALstudyin
Nishino,S.(2011).Hypothalamus,hypocretins/orexin,andvigilancecontrol. therat.J.Comp.Neurol.374,387–420.
Handb.Clin.Neurol.99,765–782.
Petrovich, G.D., Canteras, N.S., and Swanson, L.W. (2001). Combinatorial
Northcutt, R.G., and Kaas, J.H. (1995). The emergence and evolution of amygdalar inputs to hippocampal domains and hypothalamic behavior
mammalianneocortex.TrendsNeurosci.18,373–379. systems.BrainRes.BrainRes.Rev.38,247–289.
Ochsner,K.N.,andGross,J.J.(2005).Thecognitivecontrolofemotion.Trends Petrovich,G.D.,Setlow,B.,Holland,P.C.,andGallagher,M.(2002).Amyg-
Cogn.Sci.(Regul.Ed.)9,242–249. dalo-hypothalamiccircuitallowslearnedcuestooverridesatietyandpromote
eating.J.Neurosci.22,8748–8753.
Ochsner,K.N.,Bunge,S.A.,Gross,J.J.,andGabrieli,J.D.(2002).Rethinking
feelings:anFMRIstudyofthecognitiveregulationofemotion.J.Cogn.Neuro- Pfaff,D.W.(1999).Drive:neurobiologicalandmolecularmechanismsofsexual
sci.14,1215–1229. motivation(Cambridge,MA:MITPress).
Neuron73,February23,2012ª2012ElsevierInc. 673

Neuron
Perspective
Pfaff, D., Ribeiro, A., Matthews, J., and Kow, L.M. (2008). Concepts and Rolls,E.T.(1999).TheBrainandEmotion(Oxford:OxfordUniversityPress).
mechanismsofgeneralizedcentralnervoussystemarousal.Ann.NYAcad.
Sci.1129,11–25. Rolls,E.T.(2005).EmotionExplained(NewYork:OxfordUniversityPress).
Phelps,E.A.(2006).Emotionandcognition:insightsfromstudiesofthehuman Roozendaal,B.,McEwen,B.S.,andChattarji,S.(2009).Stress,memoryand
amygdala.Annu.Rev.Psychol.57,27–53. theamygdala.Nat.Rev.Neurosci.10,423–433.
Phelps, E.A., and LeDoux, J.E. (2005). Contributions of the amygdala to Rorty,A.O.(1980).Explainingemotions.InExplainingemotions,A.O.Rorty,
emotion processing: from animal models to human behavior. Neuron 48, ed.(Berkeley:UniversityofCaliforniaPress).
175–187.
Rosenkranz,J.A.,andGrace,A.A.(2002).Dopamine-mediatedmodulationof
Pinker,S.(1997).HowtheMindWorks(NewYork:Norton). odour-evokedamygdalapotentialsduringpavlovianconditioning.Nature417,
282–287.
Pirri,J.K.,andAlkema,M.J.(2012).TheneuroethologyofC.elegansescape.
Curr.Opin.Neurobiol.,inpress.PublishedonlineJanuary4,2012.10.1016/ Rudrauf,D.,Lachaux,J.P.,Damasio,A.,Baillet,S.,Hugueville,L.,Martinerie,
j.conb.2011.12.007. J., Damasio, H., and Renault, B. (2009). Enter feelings: somatosensory
responsesfollowingearlystagesofvisualinductionofemotion.Int.J.Psycho-
Pitka¨nen,A.,Savander,V.,andLeDoux,J.E.(1997).Organizationofintra- physiol.72,13–23.
amygdaloidcircuitriesintherat:anemergingframeworkforunderstanding
functionsoftheamygdala.TrendsNeurosci.20,517–523. Russell,J.A.(1980).ACircumplexModelofAffect.J.Pers.Soc.Psychol.39,
1161–1178.
Pollatos,O.,Gramann,K.,andSchandry,R.(2007).Neuralsystemsconnect-
inginteroceptiveawarenessandfeelings.Hum.BrainMapp.28,9–18. Russell,J.A.(1991).Naturallanguageconceptsofemotion.InPerspectivesin
Personality,R.Hogan,W.H.Jones,A.J.Stewart,J.M.Healy,andD.J.Ozer,
Preuss,T.M.(1995).Doratshaveprefrontalcortex?TheRose-Woolsey-Akert eds.(London:JessicaKingsley).
programreconsidered.J.Cogn.Neurosci.7,1–24.
Russell, J.A. (2003). Core affect and the psychological construction of
Prinz,J.(2004).Whichemotionsarebasic?InEmotion,EvolutionandRatio- emotion.Psychol.Rev.110,145–172.
nality, P. Cruise and D. Evans, eds. (Oxford: Oxford University Press),
Russell, J.A., and Barrett, L.F. (1999). Core affect, prototypical emotional
pp.69–87.
episodes,andotherthingscalledemotion:dissectingtheelephant.J.Pers.
Quirk,G.J.,andMueller,D.(2008).Neuralmechanismsofextinctionlearning Soc.Psychol.76,805–819.
andretrieval.Neuropsychopharmacology33,56–72.
Salamone,J.D.(1994).Theinvolvementofnucleusaccumbensdopaminein
appetitiveandaversivemotivation.Behav.BrainRes.61,117–133.
Reep,R.(1984).Relationshipbetweenprefrontalandlimbiccortex:acompar-
ativeanatomicalreview.BrainBehav.Evol.25,5–80.
Sander,D.,Grandjean,D.,andScherer,K.R.(2005).Asystemsapproachto
appraisalmechanismsinemotion.NeuralNetw.18,317–352.
Reis,D.J.,andLeDoux,J.E.(1987).Somecentralneuralmechanismsgovern-
ingrestingandbehaviorallycoupledcontrolofbloodpressure.Circulation76,
Saper, C.B. (2006). Staying awake for dinner: hypothalamic integration of
I2–I9.
sleep,feeding,andcircadianrhythms.Prog.BrainRes.153,243–252.
Reisenzein,R.(1995).OnOatleyandJohnson-Laird’sTheoryofemotionand
Saper,C.B.,Chou,T.C.,andElmquist,J.K.(2002).Theneedtofeed:homeo-
hierarchicalstructuresintheaffectivelexicon.Cogn.Emotion9,383–416.
staticandhedoniccontrolofeating.Neuron36,199–211.
Rescorla,R.A.,andWagner,A.R.(1972).AtheoryofPavlovianconditioning: Sapolsky,R.M.,Krey,L.C.,andMcEwen,B.S.(1986).Theneuroendocrinology
Variations in the effectiveness of reinforcement and nonreinforcement. In ofstressandaging:theglucocorticoidcascadehypothesis.Endocr.Rev.7,
ClassicalConditioningII:CurrentResearchandTheory,A.A.BlackandW.F. 284–301.
Prokasy,eds.(NewYork:Appleton-Centry-Crofts),pp.64–99.
Sarter,M.,Hasselmo,M.E.,Bruno,J.P.,andGivens,B.(2005).Unravelingthe
Reyes,B.A.,Carvalho,A.F.,Vakharia,K.,andVanBockstaele,E.J.(2011). attentional functions of cortical cholinergic inputs: interactions between
Amygdalar peptidergic circuits regulating noradrenergic locus coeruleus signal-drivenandcognitivemodulationofsignaldetection.BrainRes.Brain
neurons:linkinglimbicandarousalcenters.Exp.Neurol.230,96–105. Res.Rev.48,98–111.
Reynolds,S.M.,andBerridge,K.C.(2008).Emotionalenvironmentsretune Scarantino,A.(2009).Coreaffectandnaturalaffectivekinds.Philos.Sci.76,
the valence of appetitive versus fearful functions in nucleus accumbens. 940–957.
Nat.Neurosci.11,423–425.
Schachter,S.(1975).Cognitionandcentralist-peripheralistcontroversiesin
Robbins, T.W. (1997). Arousal systems and attentional processes. Biol. motivation and emotion. In Handbook of Psychobiology, M.S. Gazzaniga
Psychol.45,57–71. andC.B.Blakemore,eds.(NewYork:AcademicPress),pp.529–564.
Robbins,T.W.(2005).Chemistryofthemind:neurochemicalmodulationof Schachter,S.,andSinger,J.E.(1962).Cognitive,social,andphysiological
prefrontalcorticalfunction.J.Comp.Neurol.493,140–146. determinantsofemotionalstate.Psychol.Rev.69,379–399.
Robbins,T.W.,andEveritt,B.J.(2007).Aroleformesencephalicdopaminein Scherer,K.R.(1984).Emotionasamulticomponentprocess:Amodeland
activation:commentaryonBerridge(2006).Psychopharmacology(Berl.)191, some cross-cultural data. Review of Personality and Social Psychology 5,
433–437. 37–63.
Rodrigues,S.M.,LeDoux,J.E.,andSapolsky,R.M.(2009).Theinfluenceof Scherer,K.R.(1988).Criteriaforemotion-antecedentappraisal:Areview.In
stresshormonesonfearcircuitry.Annu.Rev.Neurosci.32,289–313. CognitivePerspectivesonEmotionandMotivation,V.Hamilton,G.H.Bower,
andN.H.Frijda,eds.(Norwell,MA:KluwerAcademicPublishers),pp.89–126.
Roitman,M.F.,Wheeler,R.A.,andCarelli,R.M.(2005).Nucleusaccumbens
neuronsareinnatelytunedforrewardingandaversivetastestimuli,encode Scherer,K.(2000).Emotionsasepisodesofsubsystemsynchronizationdriven
theirpredictors,andarelinkedtomotoroutput.Neuron45,587–597. bynonlinearappraisalprocesses.InEmotion,development,andself-organi-
zation:Dynamicsystemsapproachestoemotionaldevelopment,M.Lewis
Roitman, M.F., Wheeler, R.A., Wightman, R.M., and Carelli, R.M. (2008). andI.Granic,eds.(NewYork:CambridgeUniversityPress),pp.70–99.
Real-time chemical responses in the nucleus accumbens differentiate
rewardingandaversivestimuli.Nat.Neurosci.11,1376–1377. SchererK.R.,SchorrA.,andJohnstoneT.,eds.(2001).Appraisalprocessesin
emotion:Theory,Methods,Research(London:LondonUniversityPress).
Rolls,E.T.(1992).NeurophysiologyandFunctionsofthePrimateAmygdala.In
The Amygdala: Neurobiological Aspects of Emotion, Memory, and Mental Schildkraut,J.J.,andKety,S.S.(1967).Biogenicaminesandemotion.Science
Dysfunction,J.P.Aggleton,ed.(NewYork:Wiley-Liss,Inc.),pp.143–165. 156,21–37.
674 Neuron73,February23,2012ª2012ElsevierInc.

Neuron
Perspective
Schiller,D.,andDelgado,M.R.(2010).Overlappingneuralsystemsmediating Sutton,R.S.,andBarto,A.G.(1987)Atemporal-differencemodelofclassical
extinction,reversalandregulationoffear.TrendsCogn.Sci.(Regul.Ed.)14, conditioning.In:ProceedingsoftheNinthAnnualConferenceoftheCognitive
268–276. ScienceSociety,pp355-378.
Schimitel, F.G., de Almeida, G.M., Pitol, D.N., Armini, R.S., Tufik, S., and Swanson,L.W.(2000).Cerebralhemisphereregulationofmotivatedbehavior.
Schenberg,L.C.(2012).Evidenceofasuffocationalarmsystemwithinthe BrainRes.886,113–164.
periaqueductalgraymatteroftherat.Neuroscience200,59–73.
Swanson, L.W. (2002). Brain Architecture: Understanding the Basic Plan
Schneirla,T.C.(1959)Anevolutionarytheoryofbiphasicprocessesunderlying (Oxford:OxfordUniversityPress).
approachandwithdrawal.In:NebraskaSymposiumonMotivation(JonesMR,
ed),pp1-42:UniversityofNebraskaPress. Talarovicova,A.,Krskova,L.,andKiss,A.(2007).Someassessmentsofthe
amygdalaroleinsuprahypothalamicneuroendocrineregulation:aminireview.
Schober, J., Weil, Z., and Pfaff, D. (2011). How generalized CNS arousal Endocr.Regul.41,155–162.
strengthenssexualarousal(andviceversa).Horm.Behav.59,689–695.
Tamietto,M.,Castelli,L.,Vighetti,S.,Perozzo,P.,Geminiani,G.,Weiskrantz,
Schoenbaum, G., and Setlow, B. (2003). Lesions of nucleus accumbens L.,anddeGelder,B.(2009).Unseenfacialandbodilyexpressionstriggerfast
disruptlearningaboutaversiveoutcomes.J.Neurosci.23,9833–9841. emotionalreactions.Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA106,17661–17666.
Schulkin,J.(2003).Rethinkinghomeostasis:Allostaticregulationinphysiology
Thompson,R.,andLeDoux,J.E.(1974).Commonbrainregionsessentialfor
andpathophysiology(Cambridge:MITPress).
theexpressionoflearnedandinstinctivevisualhabitsinthealbinorat.Bull.
Psychon.Soc.4,78–80.
Schultz,W.(1997).Dopamineneuronsandtheirroleinrewardmechanisms.
Curr.Opin.Neurobiol.7,191–197.
Tinbergen, N. (1951). The Study of Instinct (New York: Oxford University
Press).
Schultz,W.(2006).Behavioraltheoriesandtheneurophysiologyofreward.
Annu.Rev.Psychol.57,87–115.
Tolman, E.C. (1932). Purposive behavior (New York: Appleton-Century-
Sears,R.M.,Liu,R.J.,Narayanan,N.S.,Sharf,R.,Yeckel,M.F.,Laubach,M., Crofts).
Aghajanian,G.K.,andDiLeone,R.J.(2010).Regulationofnucleusaccumbens
activitybythehypothalamicneuropeptidemelanin-concentratinghormone. Tomkins,S.S.(1962).Affect,Imagery,Consciousness(NewYork:Springer).
J.Neurosci.30,8263–8273.
Tooby,J.,andCosmides,L.(1990).Thepastexplainsthepresent:Emotional
Seligman,M.E.P.(1971).PhobiasandPreparedness.Behav.Ther.2,307–320. adaptationsandthestructureofancestralenvironments.EthologicalSociobi-
ology11,375–424.
Selye,H.(1955).Stressanddisease.Science122,625–631.
Trowill,J.A.,Panksepp,J.,andGandelman,R.(1969).Anincentivemodelof
Semendeferi, K., Teffer, K., Buxhoeveden, D.P., Park, M.S., Bludau, S., rewardingbrainstimulation.Psychol.Rev.76,264–281.
Amunts, K., Travis, K., and Buckwalter, J. (2011). Spatial organization of
neuronsinthefrontalpolesetshumansapartfromgreatapes.Cereb.Cortex vonHolst,E.,andvonSaint-Paul,U.(1962).Electricallycontrolledbehavior.
21,1485–1497. Sci.Am.206,50–59.
Sesack,S.R.,andGrace,A.A.(2010).Cortico-BasalGangliarewardnetwork: Vyas,A.,Kim,S.K.,Giacomini,N.,Boothroyd,J.C.,andSapolsky,R.M.(2007).
microcircuitry.Neuropsychopharmacology35,27–47. BehavioralchangesinducedbyToxoplasmainfectionofrodentsarehighly
specifictoaversionofcatodors.Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA104,6442–6447.
Shallice, T. (1988). Information processing models of consiousness. In
Consciousness in contemporary science, A. Marcel and E. Bisiach, eds. Walker,D.L.,andDavis,M.(2002).Light-enhancedstartle:furtherpharmaco-
(Oxford:OxfordU.Press),pp.305–333. logical and behavioral characterization. Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 159,
304–310.
Shallice,T.,Stuss,D.T.,Alexander,M.P.,Picton,T.W.,andDerkzen,D.(2008).
Themultipledimensionsofsustainedattention.Cortex44,794–805. Wallace,K.J.,andRosen,J.B.(2000).Predatorodorasanunconditionedfear
stimulusinrats:elicitationoffreezingbytrimethylthiazoline,acomponentof
Sheffield,F.D.,andRoby,T.B.(1950).Rewardvalueofanon-nutritivesweet- foxfeces.Behav.Neurosci.114,912–922.
taste.J.Comp.Physiol.Psychol.43,471–481.
Wang,L.,Han,X.,Mehren,J.,Hiroi,M.,Billeter,J.C.,Miyamoto,T.,Amrein,H.,
Shepherd,G.(1988).Neurobiology,SecondEdition(Oxford:OxfordUniversity Levine,J.D.,andAnderson,D.J.(2011).Hierarchicalchemosensoryregulation
Press). ofmale-malesocialinteractionsinDrosophila.Nat.Neurosci.14,757–762.
Sherrington,C.S.(1906).TheIntegrativeActionoftheNervousSystem(New
Weinberger, N.M. (1995). Retuning the brain by fear conditioning. In The
Haven:YaleU.Press).
Cognitive Neurosciences, M.S. Gazzaniga, ed. (Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press),pp.1071–1090.
Siegel, A., and Edinger, H. (1981). Neural control of aggression and rage
behavior.InHandbookoftheHypothalamus,Vol.3,BehavioralStudiesof
Whalen,P.J.,andPhelps,E.A.(2009).Thehumanamygdala(NewYork:Guil-
theHypothalamus,P.J.MorganeandJ.Panksepp,eds.(NewYork:Marcel
fordPress).
Dekker),pp.203–240.
Whalen,P.J.,Kagan,J.,Cook,R.G.,Davis,F.C.,Kim,H.,Polis,S.,McLaren,
Smith, C.A., and Ellsworth, P.C. (1985). Patterns of cognitive appraisal in
D.G., Somerville, L.H., McLean, A.A., Maxwell, J.S., and Johnstone, T.
emotion.J.Pers.Soc.Psychol.48,813–838.
(2004).Humanamygdalaresponsivitytomaskedfearfuleyewhites.Science
Sosulski, D.L., Bloom, M.L., Cutforth, T., Axel, R., and Datta, S.R. (2011). 306,2061.
Distinctrepresentationsofolfactoryinformationindifferentcorticalcentres.
Nature472,213–216. Whorf,B.L.(1956).Language,thought,andreality(Cambridge:Technology
PressofMIT).
Stellar,E.(1954).Thephysiologyofmotivation.Psychol.Rev.61,5–22.
Wickens,J.R.,Horvitz,J.C.,Costa,R.M.,andKillcross,S.(2007).Dopami-
Steriade, M. (1995). Brain activation, then (1949) and now: coherent fast nergicmechanismsinactionsandhabits.J.Neurosci.27,8181–8183.
rhythmsincorticothalamicnetworks.Arch.Ital.Biol.134,5–20.
Wierzbicka,A.(1994).Emotion,language,andculturalscripts.InEmotionand
Steriade,M.(2004).Acetylcholinesystemsandrhythmicactivitiesduringthe Culture:Empiricalstudiesofmutualinfluence,S.KitayamaandH.R.Markus,
waking—sleepcycle.Prog.BrainRes.145,179–196. eds.(Washington,DC:AmericanPsychologicalAssociation),pp.133–196.
Striedter,G.F.(2005).PrinciplesofBrainEvolution(Sunderland:SinauerAsso- Wise,R.A.(2006).Roleofbraindopamineinfoodrewardandreinforcement.
ciates). Philos.Trans.R.Soc.Lond.BBiol.Sci.361,1149–1158.
Neuron73,February23,2012ª2012ElsevierInc. 675

Neuron
Perspective
Wise,S.P.(2008).Forwardfrontalfields:phylogenyandfundamentalfunction. Zachar,P.(2006).Theclassificationofemotionandscientificrealism.J.Theor.
TrendsNeurosci.31,599–608. Philos.Psychol.26,120–138.
Yin,J.C.,andTully,T.(1996).CREBandtheformationoflong-termmemory. Zajonc,R.(1980).Feelingandthinking:preferencesneednoinferences.Am.
Curr.Opin.Neurobiol.6,264–268. Psychol.35,151–175.
Yovell,Y.,Kandel,E.R.,Dudai,Y.,andAbrams,T.W.(1992).Aquantitative Zhang, T.Y., Parent, C., Weaver, I., and Meaney, M.J. (2004). Maternal
study of the Ca2+/calmodulin sensitivity of adenylyl cyclase in Aplysia, programmingofindividualdifferencesindefensiveresponsesintherat.Ann.
Drosophila,andrat.J.Neurochem.59,1736–1744. NYAcad.Sci.1032,85–103.
676 Neuron73,February23,2012ª2012ElsevierInc.

Update
Neuron
Volume 73, Issue 5, 8 March 2012, Page 1052
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2012.02.018

Neuron
Erratum
Rethinking the Emotional Brain
JosephLeDoux*
*Correspondence:jel1@nyu.edu
DOI10.1016/j.neuron.2012.02.018
(Neuron73,653–676;February23,2012)
InFigure1andonp.656ofthisPrimer,theword‘‘vomeronasal’’wasmisspelled.Thefigureandthetexthavebeencorrectedonline.
1052 Neuron73,1052,March8,2012ª2012ElsevierInc.



1/7/25, 10:09 AM Neurotransmitter and Cell Death (Section 4, Chapter 12) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Dep…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 4: Homeostasis and Higher Brain Functions
Search
Chapter 12: Neurotransmitter and Cell Death
Pramod Dash, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
Last Review 20 Oct 2020
Brain tissue is composed of neurons and other supporting cells, such as glia. Neurons in the brain are interconnected to make
functional circuits. If these connections are interrupted as a result of trauma, brain function is impaired. Neurons are post-mitotic
and therefore cannot divide to produce new neurons making neuronal loss as a result of trauma profoundly detrimental to normal
brain function. At present, there is no effective therapy available to treat victims of brain trauma.
12.1 Epidemiology and Demographics
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) remains the leading cause of death and disability for those under the age of 44 years. It has been
estimated that nearly 2 million people suffer some degree of head injury every year in the United States alone. Although the vast
majority of these do not seek medical treatment, approximately 400,000 to 500,000 TBI victims require hospitalization.
In the US, the societal cost for TBI has been estimated at between $48 and $83.5 billion per year. Only 12.5% of the annual
financial expense is accounted for by direct cost (e.g. hospitalization, physician costs). Since most TBI patients are young and in
their peak productive years, the indirect costs (reduced or loss of productivity) represent the greatest loss to society. The
behavioral and psychological difficulties experienced by some patients are reported as being devastating not only to the patient but
to the family and society as well.
Age: TBI most commonly occurs among infants and children, individuals 15 to 29 years of age, and the elderly (65+).
Sex: The male to female incidence of TBI has been estimated to be 2 to 1.
12.2 Types of Brain Injury
According to the most recent statistics from the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the major cause of TBI is vehicular accidents,
violent acts, falls, and sports-related injury. A head injury is usually a brief event occurring in less than 200 msec. Traumatic brain
damage is a result of (immediate mechanical damage of brain tissue, or primary injury) and indirect (delayed or secondary injury)
processes. The primary injury can be lessened through preventative measures, such as education of potential victims (e.g. don’t
drink and drive), use of safety equipment (airbags, helmets) and enforcing laws for individual and public safety. In contrast,
secondary injuries are potentially amenable to therapeutic interventions because of their delayed onset and progression over
minutes to months after the initial trauma. Unfortunately, no effective treatments to abate secondary injuries are currently
available
Brain trauma can be broadly divided into three categories.
Inertia injury. (e.g. sudden acceleration or deceleration) Inertial injuries are commonly associated with Diffuse Axonal Injury
(DAI). Axons are highly vulnerable to damage following closed head inertia injury. Axonal swelling and disconnection can be seen
in mild, moderate and sever TBI patients. A subset of axons undergo axotomy as a result of primary injury, however, the majority
undergo progressive changes leading to secondary axotomy. TBI causes local mechanical and/or biochemical disruption of the
axonal cytoskeleton. This causes axonal swelling due to continued delivery of organelles to the site of injury. This continued
swelling results in the disconnection of proximal axon bulb (referred to as retraction bulb) from its distal axonal segment. Over
time the distal axonal segment undergoes Wallerian degeneration, with the downstream deafferentation of the target site.
PLAY
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter12.html 1/7

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Neurotransmitter and Cell Death (Section 4, Chapter 12) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Dep…
Figure 12.1
Formation of retraction bulb following stretch injury.
Impact injury. (e.g. getting hit with a baseball bat) Impact injuries are often accompanied by the formation of hematomas.
PLAY
point of
impact
R L
Figure 12.2
Epidural hematoma following TBI.
Penetrating injury. (e.g. gun shots) Penetrating injuries are commonly associated with post-traumatic epilepsy.
Figure 12.3
Schematic drawing of Phineas Gage.
12.3 Classification
The Glasgow coma scale (GCS) is a means of grading severity in TBI and is based on the
Table I
patient's response to eye opening, best motor response and best verbal response.
Glasgow Coma Scale
The Glasgow coma score is calculated from the scale and ranges from 3 to 15. Head injured Eye Opening
patients are classified as having mild TBI if their GCS score is 13 to 15; a moderate injury if
the GCS is 9 to 12, and a severe injury if their GCS score is 3 to 8. Spontaneously 4
To verbal command 3
To pain 2
12.4 Clinical Presentation
No response 1
Cognitive and behavioral disturbances are the primary contributors to disability in about two Best motor response
thirds of TBI patients. In the other one third of the patients, motor deficits and other 6
neurophysical sequelae contribute equally or more as compared to neuropsychological To verbal command 5
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter12.html 2/7

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Neurotransmitter and Cell Death (Section 4, Chapter 12) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Dep…
sequelae. Neuropsychological deficits following TBI is related to the region of cerebral Localizes pain 4
damage. Diffuse cerebral damage to temporal, frontal, orbital and parietal regions result in Flexion - withdrawal 3
Flexion - abnormal 2
cognitive impairments, involving memory, attention, information processing speed, intellectual
Extension 1
functioning, language, executive functions and visuospatial ability. No response
Level of consciousness and orientation. Loss of consciousness is the clinical hallmark of
Best verbal response
head injury and reflects both the amount of brain damage and its distribution. In its mildest
degree, a concussion may be expressed by the subject’s awareness and memory without loss Oriented and converses 5
of consciousness (e.g. a football player's "dings"). "Coma" is applied to more profound Disoriented and converses 4
impairments of consciousness. An altered level of consciousness may occur in the acute stage Inappropriate words 3
Incomprehensible words 2
following TBI as a result of a diffuse injury to the cerebral hemispheres or damage to the
No response 1
brainstem reticular formation. Altered consciousness is often accompanied by confusion and
disorientation. Orientation is assessed by asking the patient his name, the date [day of week,
Total Glasgow Coma Score (GCS) 3-15
month, year] and location [city, name of the hospital, floor number, room number, etc.].
Figure 12.4
Drawing of a brain showing components of the limbic system.
Memory and temporal lobe damage. Memory is the most severely affected and most frequently reported symptom by TBI
patients and their relatives. Anterograde amnesia (impairment in ability to recall newly acquired information) as well as retrograde
amnesia (impairment in ability to recall old memories) is observed. Anterograde amnesia is frequently referred to as post-
traumatic amnesia (PTA). In patients with diffused TBI, PTA is thought to be a reliable index of the severity of injury. PTA is
defined as the approximate time post-trauma when the patient establishes memory of day-to-day ongoing events. If PTA is less
than 1 hour, the injury is assumed to be mild; if less than 24 hours, it is moderate; more than 24 hours but less than one month,
the injury is severe; and when PTA is greater than 1 month, the injury is thought to be extremely severe. The longer the duration
of PTA, the more likely the patient has significant neurological disability, especially with regard to cognitive function. Memory
impairments may impact a patient's progress in a rehabilitation program, especially if the ability to learn new information is
affected. Damage to the temporal lobe, especially the hippocampus, is associated with memory impairments. As will be discussed
later, neurons in the hippocampus express high levels of glutamate receptors and often die as a result of TBI.
Attention, concentration, executive functions, behavioral disturbance and frontal lobe damage. The frontal lobe
comprises a vast expansion of cortex and white matter anterior to the central sulcus. Humans have a tremendous increase in
volume of the prefrontal region compared with other higher primates. Damage to the frontal lobe can compromise complex
decision-making, foresight and social conduct. Attention and concentration difficulties are the second most frequently reported
complaint of TBI patients with frontal lobe injuries. Patients who have mild injury usually recover from attention deficits within
three months, in contrast to those with severe injuries, who may have more permanent deficits. Slowing of cognitive function and
distractibility are also common findings. Mild TBI patients, although they perform well on standard ability tests, report that
cognitive tasks demand more effort than prior to the injury. Attention and concentration may be informally evaluated during the
course of the patient examination. Patients may have difficulty attending to the interview and may be easily distracted by external
stimuli such as hallway activity. Speed of cognitive processing may also be grossly assessed by noting the patient's response time
to questions or commands.
Executive functions are a type of brain function that motivates self initiated behavior and govern its appropriateness. Executive
functions are needed for problem solving, planning and decision-making and damage to prefrontal cortex can cause deficits in these
functions. Furthermore, verbal fluency, hypothesis generation, use of feedback and shift of strategies are also impaired.
Behavioral disturbances are a common manifestation after severe brain injury, with personality change, slowness, irritability, bad
temper, fatigue, rapid mood change and depression. The orbital frontal regions have been implicated in impulsivity, anger control,
aggressiveness, sexual acting out and social judgment. Damage to orbital frontal region can cause release of previously inhibited
behaviors and impair the ability to interpret social signals.
Visual disturbances and occipital lobe damage. The occipital lobes are the posterior part of hemispheres, and can be divided
into the primary visual cortex and visual association cortices. Damage to these areas will alter visual perception.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter12.html 3/7

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Neurotransmitter and Cell Death (Section 4, Chapter 12) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Dep…
Neglect and parietal lobe damage. Neglect refers to a phenomenon in which a patient fails to attend to a portion of
extrapersonal or intrapersonal space. In the visual modality, in which neglect is most often manifested, the patient may fail to
attend to the left hemispace, ignoring objects, persons, and movements that occur in the left side. Such a presentation is
commonly caused by lesion in the right parietal and occipitoparietal region. Severe neglect often occurs in the acute stage of brain
injury, often in the first few days or weeks after the onset of brain damage. Several months after the onset of the lesion, most
patients have recovered substantially, although subtle attentional deficits for the left-sided stimuli may still persist. Focal injury to
the dominant parietal lobe may result in impairment of mathematical skills. Deficits may limit the patient in his ability to manage
finances or participate in basic community activities, such as shopping. Calculation skills can be easily assessed by having the
patient perform serial subtraction of sevens from one hundred, although more complex multiplication and division problems can
also be administered. However, one must take pre-morbid educational history into account when interpreting the results of these
tests.
Speech and language. Language skills are commonly impaired following TBI that involve the dominant hemisphere. Difficulty
with spoken and written language or problems with language processing can occur. Language deficits are usually accompanied by
other cognitive impairments. The most common feature of traumatic aphasia is anomia, which is characterized by difficulty in
naming, word-finding deficits, and paraphasic errors. Broca's aphasia is more common in a penetrating-type injury due to a lesion
of the dominant frontal lobe. Wernicke's aphasia occurs less frequently following TBI and is caused by focal injury to the dominant
temporal lobe. Higher language skills such as complex auditory processing, spelling, sentence construction, synonyms, antonyms,
and abstract language skills, such as picture description, can be impaired.
Depression. Depression occurs frequently after brain injury. TBI patients who experience depression may report worry,
hopelessness, suicidal thoughts, and social withdrawal. It is likely that there are direct and indirect factors related to the
development of depression in brain-injured persons. Brain damage can produce direct neurophysiological and neurochemical
changes that may induce depressive symptomatology. The secondary reaction of the patient to the implications of newly acquired
disabilities certainly is a frequent and understandable source of depression.
Cranial nerve damage. TBI can damage one or more of the cranial nerves resulting in specific deficits. Olfactory dysfunction
occurs in approximately 7% of patients with TBI. This figure approaches 20% in TBI patients who have suffered from loss of
consciousness. Furthermore, the olfactory nerve is the most commonly affected cranial nerve in mild TBI. Impairment in detection
of smell is usually caused by frontal or occipital blows causing direct injury to the olfactory pathways. Olfactory dysfunction can
lead to functional impairment, including diminished pleasure and potential safety problems due to inability to detect dangerous
smells such as gas.
Second-order olfactory neuron
Glomerulus
Olfactory bulb Olfactory tract
PLAY
Olfactory nerve
Cribriform plate
Olfactory receptor cells
Figure 12.5
Olfactory nerve damage following TBI.
Post-traumatic epilepsy. Epileptic seizures occur in 2.5 to 5% of patients with traumatic brain injury. In 1930, Foerester and
Penfield induced seizure activity by electrical stimulation of areas surrounding a gunshot lesion of cerebral cortex. These findings
suggested the presence of an epileptic zone or penumbra surrounding the site of injury. Furthermore, retraction of dura that had
become adherent to the damaged cortex also triggered seizures. This hypothesis is supported by clinical findings that head injuries
associated with dural penetration are associated with the highest incidence of post-traumatic epilepsy (27 to 43%). An intriguing
hypothesis of post- traumatic epilepsy has been the implication of blood breakdown products in the cellular events that lead to
epileptogenesis. An important role for iron deposition has been supported by experimental studies in animals. Another possibility
is that TBI can create imbalances between neuronal excitation and inhibition that can lead to post-traumatic epileptogenesis.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter12.html 4/7

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Neurotransmitter and Cell Death (Section 4, Chapter 12) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Dep…
TBI is a risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease. Epidemiological studies have suggested that head injury may be a risk factor for
Alzheimer’s disease. Histopathological examination of brains from patients who died as a consequence of head trauma has shown
amyloid beta (Ab) deposition. It is also interesting to note that demential pugilistica (punch-drunk syndrome) is also associated
with memory loss and diffuse Ab deposition. Carriers of the apolipoprotein E4 (apoE4) allele, which may play a direct role in Ab
deposition in vivo, have been shown to be an increase risk factor for developing Alzheimer’s disease. Head-injured patients with
apoE4 are more than twice as likely as those without apoE4 to have an unfavorable outcome.
12.5 Molecular Mechanisms of Secondary Injury
As indicate above, traumatic injury to the central nervous system is a progressive disorder with two distinct components. The
initial, immediate biomechanical damage (referred to as primary injury) is defined as structural damage to neurons, their
supporting cells and vasculature. Secondary injury consists of progressive cellular damage resulting from degradative biochemical
processes that occur as a response to the primary injury. The recognition of secondary injury as a progressive biochemical disorder
implies that a window of time exists in which effective pharmacotherapy could be administered.
Na+ Ca2+ Na+
2+
Glutamate Ca
Na+
Ca2+Na+ Mg2+
Na+
Na+
Cytoplasm
K+
K+
K+
NMDA Receptor
K+ K+ K+ K+
K+
K+ PLAY
- Closed
- Blocked ( + Glutamate)
- Open ( + Glutamate + Depolorization)
Figure 12.6
Transport of ions through a NMDA receptor
Excitatory amino acid receptors. Levels of extracellular excitatory amino acids (e.g. glutamate and aspartate) are increased
following brain trauma. These neurotransmitters activate specific cell surface receptors causing influx of sodium and calcium ions
into the cytosol. Glutamate is the most abundant excitatory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system. Binding of glutamate
to NMDA receptors allows influx of sodium and calcium ions into neurons. Influx of sodium leads to neuronal swelling and increase
intracellular calcium causes cell death. Antagonists for NMDA and non-NMDA receptors have been shown to be neuroprotective in
experimental TBI. Clinical trials using excitatory amino acid blockers, however, have shown discouraging results and unwanted side
effects, namely psychotropic problems.
Calcium ions. Among ions, calcium has drawn the most attention. This ion has been implicated in cerebral edema, vasospasm
and cell death following injury to the CNS. Increases in intracellular calcium can occur via multiple pathways including, NMDA
receptors, calcium channels and release of calcium from intracellular stores. Sustained elevations of intracellular calcium are toxic.
The molecular events triggered by elevated calcium include activation of proteases, lipases, generation of free radicals and
impairment of mitochondrial function leading to energy failure.
Proteolytic mechanisms of cell death. The calpain family of proteases are activated by elevated intracellular calcium. Calpains
proteolyze many cellular proteins including cytoskeletal proteins, excitatory amino acid receptors, cell adhesion molecules and
enzymes. Breakdown of these proteins causes irreversible structural and functional alterations leading to cellular necrosis. Another
family of proteases, the caspases, also cause cell death following CNS injury. Caspases are involved in neuronal apoptosis.
Apoptosis differs from necrosis in that cell lysis does not occur and is a relatively slower process of cell death.
Phospholipases. Elevated intracellular calcium phospholipases, enzymes that degrade membrane lipids, increase following TBI.
Breakdown of membrane lipids (notably by phospholipase A2) result in loss of cellular integrity, ionic imbalance and cell death.
Free radicals. Free radicals are highly reactive molecules that damage neuronal, glial and vascular membrane phospholipids and
cause oxidation of cellular proteins and nucleic acids. The brain appears to be particularly vulnerable to such oxidative injury. It
contains relatively high concentrations of readily peroxidizable fatty acids. Furthermore, the brain is poorly supplied with protective
antioxidant enzymes and endogenous antioxidant compounds. Free radicals cause widespread cellular and vascular damage.
Potential sources of oxygen free radicals within the injured brain include mitochondrial leakage, arachidonic acid metabolism,
xanthine oxidase pathway and catecholamine oxidation. Several drugs have been tested for their ability to protect free radical-
mediated damage. Superoxide dismutase (SOD) and its polyethylene glycol-conjugate (PEG-SOD), which has a longer biological
half life, has been shown to be neuroprotective in experimental models. However, a multi-center study did not show a significantly
improved outcome in patients who received PEG-SOD compared to those who received placebo.
Secondary Injury. The pathology of TBI reflects the initial insult, resulting from mechanical damage to neural and vascular
structures (the primary injury), and the evolution of a cascade of secondary events that impair function, damage structures, and
promote further cell death collectively referred to as secondary injury. Secondary injury encompasses a number of pathological
processes that can continue to evolve over a period of days, weeks or even months, after the primary insult. For example, neurons
in the CNS that are synaptically connected not only release neurotransmitters but also neurotrophic factors (e.g. BDNF) that are
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter12.html 5/7

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Neurotransmitter and Cell Death (Section 4, Chapter 12) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Dep…
critical for their survival. Damage to the axon of a neuron as a result of primary injury leads to its degeneration disconnection from
the post-synaptic neuron. This results in reduced availability of neurotrophic factors leading to eventual degeneration (via
apoptosis or programmed cell death) of the post-synaptic neuron. Since secondary injuries evolve over time after the primary
injury, they may provide a window of opportunity for therapeutic intervention.
PLAY
Figure 12.7
Delayed cell death following TBI.
12.6 Spinal Cord Injury (SCI)
Traumatic injury to the spinal cord causes loss of sensory and motor function distal to the point of injury. There are approximately
400,000 patients with SCI in the US. The leading causes of SCI are motor vehicle accidents, violent acts and sports-related
injuries, especially diving accidents. The majority of the victims are typically between the ages of 16 and 25 years.
5
6
7
PLAY
Figure 12.8 Figure 12.9
Biomechanics of cervical SCI. Myotome chart.
Pathophysiology of SCI. The pathophysiology of SCI can be divided into three phases: Primary, secondary and chronic
processes. Primary injury results mainly from mechanical damage, while secondary process involves apoptotic cell death, release
of growth inhibitory molecules and glial scar formation. Chronic pain syndrome develops usually within several months to years
following injury. This pain profoundly affects the quality of life.
Targets for Intervention. The most immediate intervention in SCI treatment is patient stabilization and decompression of the
vertebral columns to prevent further trauma. An acute treatment recommended by the National Acute Spinal Cord Injury Study is
administration of a high dose of methylprednisolone (MP), a steroid, within eight hours of injury. MP is thought to decrease edema,
inflammatory response and/or free radical production. Many axons are demyelinated as result of secondary injury. Voltage-gated
potassium channel blocker 4-aminopyridine (4-AP) looks extremely promising in clinical trials. Application of 4-AP blocks potassium
channels and partially restores action potential conduction properties.
12.7 Future Directions
Molecular and genetic strategies may represent new avenues for future clinical trials. The following processes have to succeed for
recovery of neuronal functions following brain trauma.
a. Survival of injured neurons
b. Growth of severed axons through the glial scar
c. Guidance of regenerating axons towards their targets
d. Reinnervation of appropriate targets
Test Your Knowledge
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter12.html 6/7

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Neurotransmitter and Cell Death (Section 4, Chapter 12) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Dep…
Question 1 A B C D E
An elderly person suffered relatively mild head trauma, but subsequently developed a progressive
dementia over the course of several weeks, is most likely to have sustained which of the following?
A. An acute subdural hematoma
B. An acute epidural hematoma
C. A chronic subdural hematoma
D. An intracerebral hematoma
E. An intracerebellar hematoma
Question 2 A B C D E
In automobile accidents, collision with the windshield at high speed is highly likely to produce an
intracranial hemorrhage in which one of the following structures?
A. Occipital
B. Thalamus
C. Putamen
D. Parietal lobe
E. Temporal lobe
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter12.html 7/7



1/7/25, 10:09 AM Blood Brain Barrier and Cerebral Metabolism (Section 4, Chapter 11) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosci…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 4: Homeostasis and Higher Brain Functions
Search
Chapter 11: Blood Brain Barrier and Cerebral Metabolism
Pramod Dash, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
Last Review 20 Oct 2020
11.1 Blood-brain Barrier Maintains the Constancy of the Brain's Internal Environment
The blood-brain barrier (BBB) protects the neural tissue from variations in blood composition and toxins. Elsewhere in the body the
extracellular concentrations of hormones, amino acids and potassium undergo frequent fluctuations, especially after meals, exercise
or stressful times. Since many of these molecules regulate neuronal excitability, a similar change in the composition of interstitial
fluid in the CNS can lead to uncontrolled brain activity. The endothelial cells forming the blood-brain barrier are highly specialized
to allow precise control over the substances that enter or leave the brain.
Discovery of blood-brain barrier. The discovery of the BBB dates back more than 100 years when, in the 1880s, Paul Ehrlich
observed that intravenous administration of certain dyes (e.g. trypan blue) stained all organs except the brain and the spinal cord.
He concluded that the dyes had a lower affinity for binding to the nervous system as compared to other tissues. In 1913, Edwin
Goldman, an associate of Ehrlich, demonstrated the very same dyes, when directly injected into the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF),
readily stained nervous tissue but not other tissues. The term “blood-brain barrier” was coined, however, by Lewandowsky in 1898,
after he and his colleagues had performed experiments to demonstrate that neurotoxic agents affected brain function only when
directly injected into the brain but not when injected into the vascular system. It took an additional 70 years until Reese and
colleagues localized the barrier to the capillary endothelial cells within the brain by electron-microscopic studies.
PLAY
PLAY
Figure 11.1a Figure 11.1b
Systemic injection. Intraventricular injection.
Endothelial cells in brain capillaries are the site of the BBB. The BBB in adults consists of a complex cellular system of a
highly specialized basal membrane, a large number of pericytes embedded in the basal membrane and astrocytic end feet.
Whereas the endothelial cells form the barrier proper, the interaction with adjacent cells seems to be required for the development
of the barrier. The brain endothelial cells differ from endothelial cells from other organs in two important ways. First, continuous
tight junctions are present between brain endothelial cells. These tight junctions prevent paracellular movement of molecules.
Second, there are no detectable transendothelial pathways such as intracellular vesicles. These properties of brain endothelial cells
provide a barrier between the blood and the brain. Some of the key processes are depicted in Figure 11.1.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter11.html 1/9

Brain
Lumen
L-DOPA
Endothelial cell
DOPAMINE
L D- O P A
E n d o ht e ail c l e ll
D O P A M NI E
B ar ni
1/7/25, 10:09 AM Blood Brain Barrier and Cerebral Metabolism (Section 4, Chapter 11) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosci…
GluT
Endothelial cell
Brain
Glucose
GluT Brain
Glucose
Endothelial cell
Water
Astrocyte foot
Brain
Glucose transport
Water Transport
L-DOPA transport
Figure 11.2
Components of the BBB and the transport of molecules across the barrier.
1. The continuous tight junctions that join the endothelial cells in the brain capillaries limit the diffusion of molecules across the
BBB.
2. The basement (basal) membrane provides structural support for the capillary and specific proteins present in the basement
membrane have been proposed to be involved in the development of the BBB.
3. Astrocytic foot processes release specific factors and are necessary for the development of the BBB. Astrocytic foot processes
contain water channels (aquaporin-4) that allow water uptake and contribute to brain swelling.
4. Transport carriers for glucose and essential amino acids facilitate the movement of these solutes into the brain. Since brain
cells cannot synthesize these essential amino acids, it is taken up from the blood.
5. Secondary transport systems appear to cause efflux of small molecules and nonessential amino acids from the brain to the
blood.
6. Sodium ion transporters on the luminal membrane and Na,K-ATPase on the anti-luminal membrane account for movement of
sodium from the blood to the brain. The large number of mitochondrias present in the brain endothelial cells provide energy
for the function of this Na,K-ATPase.
7. The "enzymatic blood-brain-barrier": Metabolic processes within the brain capillary endothelial cells are important to blood-
brain function and control the entry of neurotransmitters into the brain.
11.2 Molecular Components of Tight Junctions
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter11.html 2/9

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Blood Brain Barrier and Cerebral Metabolism (Section 4, Chapter 11) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosci…
Figure 11.3
Schematic illustration of junctional molecules.
The tight junctions between endothelial cells are responsible for the barrier function. Occludin was the first integral membrane
protein found to be exclusively localized within the tight junctions. However, mice carrying the null mutation in the occludin gene
develop morphologically normal tight junctions, indicating that occluding is not essential for proper tight junction formation. In
contrast to occluding, claudins have been shown to be required for the formation of tight junctions. The integral membrane
proteins of tight junctions are linked to the cytoskeleton via zone occluding-1 (ZO-1), ZO-2 and ZO-3. In addition, non-occludin
adherens junctions are found intermingled with tight junctions. In adherens junctions, the endothelial specific, integral membrane
proteins VE-cadherins are found. Furthermore, a family of proteins called junctional adhesion molecules (JAM), and recently
discovered endothelial cell-selective adhesion molecules (ESAM), are localized in the tight junctions of the BBB. Their precise
function in BBB integrity remains to be determined.
All areas of the brain do not have a blood-brain barrier. The structures located at strategic positions in the midline of the
ventricular system and lack the BBB are collectively referred to as circumventricular organs (CVOs). In these non-barrier regions,
the tight junctions between endothelial cells are discontinuous thus allowing entry of molecules. Many of these areas participate in
hormonal control.
Areas of brain without a blood-brain barrier:
Pituitary gland
Median eminence
Area postrema
Preoptic recess
Paraphysis
Pineal gland
Endothelium of choroid plexus
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter11.html 3/9

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Blood Brain Barrier and Cerebral Metabolism (Section 4, Chapter 11) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosci…
Figure 11.4
Circumventricular organs
Substances with High Lipid Solubility May Move Across the BBB by Simple Diffusion. Diffusion is the major entry
mechanism for most psychoactive drugs. Figure 11.2 shows that the rate of entry of compounds that diffuse into the brain depends
on their lipid solubility. The lipid solubility is estimated by oil/water partition coefficient.
Figure 11.5a depicts how the oil/water partition coefficient is calculated. Figure 11.5b shows the relationship between oil/water
partition coefficient and brain penetration of selected molecules.
PLAY
drug
oil
water
Figure 11.5a Figure 11.5b Figure 11.6
Distribution of hydrophilic Distribution of hydrophobic Relationship between brain penetration of
compounds. compounds. molecules and their partition coefficient.
Water. Water readily enters the brain. As a consequence of its high permeability, water moves freely into and out of the brain as
the osmolarity of the plasma changes. This phenomenon is clinically useful, since the intravenous administration of poorly
permeable compounds such as mannitol will osmotically dehydrate the brain and reduce intracranial pressure. This method is
sometimes used in head trauma patients to reduce intracranial pressure.
Gases. Gases such as CO2, O2 and volatile anesthetics diffuse rapidly into the brain. As a consequence, the rate at which their
concentration in the brain comes into equilibrium with plasma is limited primarily by the cerebral blood flow rate.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter11.html 4/9

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Blood Brain Barrier and Cerebral Metabolism (Section 4, Chapter 11) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosci…
11.3 Transport of Glucose and Amino Acids
Lumen Brain
GluT
Glucose
Endothelial cell
PLAY
Figure 11.7
Transport of glucose across the BBB.
Carrier-mediated transport enables molecules with low lipid solubility to traverse the blood-brain barrier. Glucose from
blood enters the brain by a transport protein. Glucose is the primary energy substrate of the brain. Glucose transport protein
(GLUT-1) is highly enriched in brain capillary endothelial cells. These transporters carry glucose molecules through the blood brain
barrier. Although rare, patients with Glut-1 deficiency (caused by genetic mutations) can have severe learning difficulties. Low
glucose sugar levels in the cerebrospinal, but not in the blood, will identify the condition.
The essential amino acids cannot be synthesized by the brain and, therefore, must be supplied from protein breakdown and diet.
Phenylalanine, leucine, tyrosine, isoleucine, valine, tryptophan, methionine and histidine, which are essential amino acids, and also
the precursor of dopamine, L-DOPA, enter the brain as rapidly as glucose. These amino acids are transported into the brain by the
leucine-preferring or the L-type transport proteins. These compounds compete with each other for entry into the brain. Therefore,
an elevation of plasma level of one will inhibit uptake of the others. This competition may be important for certain metabolic
diseases such as phenylketonuria (PKU), where high levels of phenylalanine in plasma reduce brain uptake of other essential amino
acids.
Small neutral amino acids, such as alanine, glycine, proline and GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid), are markedly restricted in their
entry into the brain. These amino acids are non-essential amino acids and are transported by alanine-preferring or A-type
transport protein. The A-type transport protein is not present on the luminal surface of the blood brain barrier. In contrast, these
small neutral amino acids appear to be transported out of the brain across the blood-brain-barrier.
11.4 Protection of Brain from Blood-borne Neurotoxins and Drugs
P-glycoproteins are ATP-driven pumps which confer multi-drug resistance to cancer cells by pumping drugs out of the cells. These
proteins are expressed in brain endothelial cells that can limit the BBB permeability of hydrophobic compounds, such as cyclosporin
A and vinblastine, by pumping them from the endothelial cells back to the blood.
Metabolic processes within the brain capillary endothelial cells are important to blood-brain function. Most neurotransmitters
present in the blood do not enter the brain because of their low lipid solubility and lack of specific transport carriers in the luminal
membrane of the capillary endothelial cell (see Figure 11.1). In contrast, L-DOPA, the precursor for dopamine, has an affinity for
the L-type transporter. Therefore, it enters the brain more easily from the blood than would be predicted based on its lipid
solubility. Patients with Parkinson's disease are treated with L-DOPA rather than with dopamine because of this fact. However, the
penetration of L-DOPA into the brain is limited by the presence of enzymes L-DOPA decarboxylase and monoamine oxidase within
the capillary endothelial cells. This "enzymatic blood-brain barrier" limits passage of L-DOPA into the brain and explains the need
for large doses of L-DOPA in the treatment of Parkinson's disease. Therapy is currently enhanced by concurrent treatment with an
inhibitor of L-DOPA decarboxylase.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter11.html 5/9

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Blood Brain Barrier and Cerebral Metabolism (Section 4, Chapter 11) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosci…
Figure 11.8a
Lumen
Brain
L-DOPA
Endothelial cell
Figure 11.8b
Transport of L-Dopa across the
BBB.
PLAY
DOPAMINE
Endothelial monoamine oxidase may also play a role in the inactivation of neurotransmitters released by neuronal activity.
Monoamines show very little uptake when presented from the luminal side. The uptake systems for monoamines are present in the
antiluminal surface of the brain capillary endothelial cells. The brain endothelial capillary also contains a variety of other
neurotransmitter-metabolizing enzymes such as cholinesterases, GABA transaminases, aminopeptidase and endopeptidases. In
addition, several drug and toxin metabolizing enzymes are also found in the brain capillaries. Thus the "enzymatic blood brain
barrier" protects the brain not only from circulating neurotransmitters but also from many toxins.
Compromised BBB and Disease. BBB dysfunction can lead to neuronal damage and disturbed brain function. Diseases such as
encephalitis, multiple sclerosis (MS), stroke or tumors induce deterioration of the BBB with devastating influence on neuronal
function. These conditions decrease the production of the tight junction protein claudin. Brain tumors cause complete breakdown
of the BBB that leads to peritumoral edema. Furthermore, tumor cells secrete specific factors [e.g. vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) that induces formation of new blood vessels (or angiogenesis)] which tend to be leaky.
HO
O
___
N CH
3
HO
PLAY
Figure 11.9
Modification of molecules for improved brain
penetration.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter11.html 6/9

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Blood Brain Barrier and Cerebral Metabolism (Section 4, Chapter 11) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosci…
Bypassing the BBB with drugs. A number of drugs of potential therapeutic value do not readily enter the brain because they
have low lipid solubility and are not transported by specific carriers present in the BBB. To overcome this limitation, schemes have
been developed to enhance drug entry into the brain. 1) One way to bypass the BBB is to deliver the drug directly into the CSF.
This approach can be used to treat patients with meningitis or cancerous cells in the CSF. 2) Certain vasoactive compounds such as
bradykinin and histamine, which do not alter BBB in normal people, can enhance permeability of BBB in pathological conditions.
These compounds can be used to deliver chemotherapeutic agents into the brain. 3) Drugs can be synthesized with high BBB
permeability to improve entry into the brain. Most neuroactive drugs are effective because they dissolve in lipids and easily enter
the brain. For example, heroin and morphine are very similar in structure. However, heroin, which has two acetyl groups, is more
lipid soluble. This greater lipid solubility of heroin explains its more rapid onset of action. Once within the brain, the acetyl group
of heroin is removed enzymatically to produce morphine, which only slowly leaves the brain. An understanding of the transport
process is crucial to development of the next generation of drugs useful in treating brain diseases.
11.5 Cerebral Metabolism and Blood Flow
Cerebral Metabolism
The brain is metabolically one of the most active of all organs in the body. The brain does not store excess energy and derives
almost all of its energy needs from aerobic oxidation of glucose. Therefore, it requires a continuous supply of glucose and oxygen
to meet its energy requirements. Most of the brain's energy consumption is used for active transport of ions to sustain and restore
the membrane potentials discharged during the process of excitation and conduction. When blood flow to the brain stops and
absence of oxygen and blood occurs, a loss of consciousness results in 5-10 seconds. If the blood flow is not resumed within
several minutes, there is permanent brain damage. It is well known that during crises, such as cardiac arrest, damage to the brain
occurs earliest and is most decisive in determining the degree of recovery. The absence of glucose is equally destructive, but the
time course resulting in irreversible damage from hypoglycemia is longer because other substrates can be used.
Different regions of the brain have different energy requirements, which are related to the neuronal activity in these regions.
Measurement of amounts of glucose used per minute in different brain regions of a normal conscious rat and monkey demonstrates
glucose utilization varies widely throughout the brain. Moreover, the average value in the gray matter is approximately five times
more than that in the white matter.
The amount of blood flow is directly related to brain activity. In a separate group of animals the amount of blood flow to brain
areas was determined. The results show that more blood flows to the area of the brain with high metabolic activity.
Figure
11.10
Relationship
between
cerebral
blood flow
and glucose
metabolism.
Figure 11.10 shows there is an excellent correlation between the amount of glucose uses and local cerebral blood flow.
Regulation of blood flow to a brain area is achieved by control of dilation of cerebral vessels. The dilation of blood vessels is
controlled by local factors such as nitric oxide (NO), PaCO2, PaO2 and pH. High NO, high PaCO2, low PaCO2 and low pH, which are
produced as a result of brain activity, tend to dilate the blood vessels and increase blood flow. The rate of production of these
chemicals is dependent of activity and rates of energy metabolism. Therefore, blood flow to a brain region is related to neuronal
activity in that region.
Glucose utilization and brain imaging. Glucose metabolism is the major energy source for the brain. Glucose from the blood
enters the brain with help of Glut-1 transport protein. Once inside a brain cell, it enters the glycolytic pathway, where it is
converted to pyruvate and then metabolized through the Krebs cycle to generate ATP. A fraction of ATP molecules is used to
generate high energy phosphocreatine molecules. Under conditions, aerobic metabolism of glucose is capable of providing the
brain with sufficient energy from ATP and phosphocreatine to maintain normal function. When brain failure occurs, there is a loss of
phosphocreatine initially, followed by ATP depletion, which generally signals severe damage to the brain.
Glucose deprivation can result in abnormal brain function. Hypoglycemia, which can result from excessive insulin, is associated
with changes in mental state. These changes can be rapidly reversed by glucose administration. In certain circumstances, such as
during starvation, the brain can use “ketone bodies” in place of glucose as substrates. Ketone bodies, acetoacetate and D-beta-
hydroxybutyrate are formed from catabolism of fatty acids by the liver. The ketone bodies are metabolized to generate acyl-CoA
which enters the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA) at a sufficient rate to meet the metabolic demand of the brain.
Measurement of local glucose utilization. The local energy metabolism is coupled to local functional activity. Using an
autoradiography analog of glucose, 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG), has been employed to measure glucose metabolism in experimental
animals.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter11.html 7/9

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Blood Brain Barrier and Cerebral Metabolism (Section 4, Chapter 11) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosci…
Deoxyglucose Glucose
-P
-P
-P
-P
Hexokinase Hexokinase
PLAY -P PLAY
Figure 11.11a Figure 11.11b
Phosphorylated deoxyglucose is a poor substrate Phosphorylated glucose is an excellent substrate
for glycolysis. for glycolysis.
Figure 11.4 illustrates the fundamental principle of radioactive deoxy glucose method for measuring the local cerebral glucose
utilization. Glucose utilization begins with phosphorylation of glucose by hexokinase. The resulting glucose-6-phosphate is not
retained in the tissues. Instead, it is metabolized further to products such as CO2 and H2O that leave the tissue. 2-deoxyglucose
is an analog of glucose and is transported across the blood-brain barrier by the glucose carrier system. Inside brain cells, 2-
deoxyglucose is phosphorylated by hexokinase to deoxyglucose-6-phosphate (DG-6-P) and cannot be further degraded into CO2
and H2O. Instead it is trapped and accumulates in the tissue quantitatively for a reasonable length of time. By putting a label on
deoxyglucose (such as in [18F] fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose), it is possible to measure the rate of labeled deoxyglucose-6-phosphate
formation. The amount of 18FDG-6-phosphate can be directly determined using positron emission tomography (PET). The 2-
deoxyglucose method has been modified for human use with PET, with short lived positron emitting isotopes labeled to the 2-
deoxyglucose.
11.6 Functional Activation of Energy Metabolism
A
PLAY
B
PLAY
C
PLAY
Figure 11.12
Brain activation in response to auditory stimulation.
Because of the coupling of metabolism to function, functional activation by specific stimuli tasks leads to regional increase in the
glucose metabolism in corresponding cerebral structures. Movement of fingers and hands increases metabolism in the respective
brain regions. In right handed volunteers, spontaneous speech increased metabolic activities in Broca's region. Presentation of
visual images increases glucose utilization in the primary visual cortex.
Functional MRI. A variant of MRI called functional MRI (fMRI) is based on the increase in the blood flow to specific brain regions
that accompanies neuronal activity. Increase in blood flow results in a local decrease in deoxyhemoglobin due to less oxygen
extraction. Deoxyhemoglobin is paramagnetic and serves as the source for the signal in fMRI. Unlike PET, fMRI uses a signal
intrinsic to the brain and has emerged as the technology of choice for probing brain function.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter11.html 8/9

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Blood Brain Barrier and Cerebral Metabolism (Section 4, Chapter 11) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosci…
Figure 11.13
Basic principle of functional MRI.
11.7 Brain Disorders and Metabolism
Convulsive disorders are functional disturbances of brain activity and lead to marked changes in brain metabolism and cerebral
blood flow. The metabolic changes detected by PET can frequently complement electrophysiological recordings to locate
epileptogenic foci. This information helps neurosurgeons to surgically remove the epileptogenic focus.
Metabolic measurements using PET can be used to determine the size of infarction following ischemic stroke. Brain tumors have
high metabolic needs and are heavily vascularized. PET or fMRI can be used to locate the tumor and evaluate effectiveness of a
therapy.
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter11.html 9/9



1/7/25, 10:09 AM CNS Aging and Alzheimer's Disease (Section 4, Chapter 10) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 4: Homeostasis and Higher Brain Functions
Search
Chapter 10: CNS Aging and Alzheimer's Disease
Jack C. Waymire, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
Last Review 20 Oct 2020
The improvement in overall health care has brought about an increase in the life span of the population and created the problem of
dealing with the health care needs and diseases that affect the elderly. This situation has unmasked Alzheimer's disease, a
formidable disease that will be discussed in detail later in this chapter.
10.1 Aging Is a Normal Biological Process
Maximal and average life expectancy -- Aging is a normal biological process that is programmed into the genetics of all species.
Thus aging, per se, is not caused by disease. Each animal species has a maximal life expectancy that is hypothesized to be
unchangeable. Figure 10.1 is a survival curve for humans illustrating that the maximal life expectancy is approximately 90 years of
age. In contrast to maximal life expectancy, the average life expectancy of individuals of a species can be dramatically influenced
by environmental influences, especially disease. Thus, Figure 10.1 also shows that the average life expectancy has changed
markedly. The figure shows that the average life expectancy, represented by “fifty percent survivors” has increased from 47 years
in 1900 to 70+ years in 1989.
Figure 10.1
Trends in human longevity over time. (Adapted from illustration
originally published by B.L. Strehler, Implications of Aging Research
for Society. Federation Proceedings, 34(1)5-8,1975.)
10.2 Biological Changes in the Absence of Disease in Aging Humans
Below are listed some of the biological changes that occur in aging humans in the absence of disease.
Reductions in the following sensory functions:
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter10.html 1/9

1/7/25, 10:09 AM CNS Aging and Alzheimer's Disease (Section 4, Chapter 10) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
temperature regulation
high frequency hearing, taste, smell, feel, touch & pain sensitivity
transparency of the optical light path
Examples of major changes in proteins with age:
collagen become less elastic
muscle protein is reduced (muscular strength and autonomic tone decrease)
levels of brain neurotransmitter synthesizing enzyme decrease
General changes in aging:
function of the immunological system deceases
neuronal conduction velocity decreases
O2 consumption decreases
ATP synthesis rate decreases
reduced thermal regulation
reduced cardiovascular regulatory function
Behavioral changes in aging (These usually are not marked):
reduced short-term memory
bouts of forgetfulness
transient confusion
errors in judgment
reduced learning rate
decreased ability to respond to stress
CNS parameters that decrease in aging:
brain weight and volume - 15%
gray matter content; for example 50% of the motor neurons in the anterior horn may disappear by age 60 years
Nissl substance reflecting decreased mRNA in neurons
dendritic arborization and spine number
dendrite diameter
chromatin staining
melanin pigment (retina, locus ceruleus and substantia nigra)
synaptic vesicle number in some neurons
CNS parameters that increase in aging:
ventricular volume
astroglia number and size
myelin sheath thickness
lipofuscin (formerly termed aging pigment)
neuritic plaques and neurofibrillary tangles
10.3 Alzheimer's Disease (AD)
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) has become the most common neurodegenerative disorder, currently affecting nearly twenty five million
worldwide. AD, which begins with mild memory deficits and modest neuronal death, is followed by progressive extensive neuronal
death, eventually leading to severe dementia. In addition, AD is frequently accompanied by other neurological and personality
impairments including slow movements, hampered motor coordination, general confusion and personality change. AD patients
generally live for about 9 years after initial clinical diagnosis. Thus treatment is necessary for extensive time periods. This not only
places a great burden on caregivers, but the economy as well, with an annual cost yearly of $160 billion worldwide. AD is
estimated to affect over four million people in the USA (10% of the population over 65 and 47% of those over 85). The
pathological features of Alzheimer’s disease, described below, are associated with profound degeneration of neurons and synapses
in a few regions of the CNS, including the temporal, parietal, and frontal cortices, all of which are associated with learning and
memory processes. The two most characteristic pathological inclusions found in the brains of AD patients are extracellular deposits
of β-amyloid peptides (Aβ) that lead to senile plaque formation and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles of hyperphosphorylated tau.
However, increasing evidence has suggested that inflammation may play a critical role in AD pathogenesis as well.
10.4 Diagnosis of Alzheimer's Disease
In this chapter, the changes that occur with AD and the way to clinically diagnose the disease are summarized as a means to
describe the disease and to illustrate how the physician must clinically evaluate the possibility of AD. According to the Psychiatric
Manual three progressive stages or categories of AD diagnosis are defined. These include: 1) Suspected AD, 2) Probable AD, and 3)
Definite AD. Definite AD can only be diagnosed after pathological brain specimens are examined by either biopsy or
autopsy. The characteristics used to diagnose AD are listed below.
Suspected AD. The following are changes that would lead to the diagnosis of Suspected AD (note that many of the behavioral
changes overlap with those occurring in normal aging:)
loss of mental capacity
loss of recent memory
forgetfulness
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter10.html 2/9

1/7/25, 10:09 AM CNS Aging and Alzheimer's Disease (Section 4, Chapter 10) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
transient periods of confusion
restlessness
lethargic periods
errors in judgment
reduced capacity to learn
Probable AD. Once a patient is determined to meet the criteria for diagnosis of suspected AD; further tests are conducted to
establish the likelihood of AD. If the patient satisfies the criteria below, the diagnosis of Probable AD is made.
clear dementia, (termed senile dementia)-defined as being afflicted by or manifesting unsoundness of mind or an inability to
control one's rational processes.
onset between ages of 40 and 90
deficits in two or more cognitive spheres
progressive deterioration of memory and other cognitive functions
no disturbances of consciousness
no other illness that could account for progressive cognitive deficits (for example, not cerebral vascular disease)
Figure 10.2
Comparison of a normal human brain and a brain
from a patient who died with AD. (click images to
enlarge)
Definite AD. To make the diagnosis of Definite AD, morphological pathological inclusions must be present in the patient’s CNS. The
nature of the pathological changes that occur in AD and the use of some of these features in the diagnosis of AS are described
below.
atrophied cerebral hemispheres (Figure 10.2)
dilated ventricles
Neurofibrillary tangles. These are non-membrane bound masses of fibers in the cell bodies of neurons, shown in Figure
10.3. Neurofibrillary tangles contain many tightly adherent pairs of helical filaments. These are termed paired helical
filaments (PHF). Neurofibrillary tangles also contain the same pathological protein, β-amyloid, found in neurite plaques (see
below).
Figure 10.3
AD brain showing
neurofibrillary
tangles and kinky
neurites.
Paired helical filaments. Because neurons bearing PHF appear intact and functional, PHF are believed to precede the death
of a neuron. Because antibodies to cytoskeleton proteins, such as tau and tubulin, cross-react with PHF it is believed that PHF
are composed of modified cytoskeletal proteins. One hypothesis, discussed below, is that PHF are hyper-phosphorylated tau
protein. You will recall that tau protein is a microtubule associated protein (MAP)
Neurite plaques are defined as spherical clusters of dystrophic neurites surrounding a core of β amyloid and are found
predominantly in gray matter. (Neurite plaques are also called senile plaques or neuritic plaques). These 10 - 100 µm
diameter structures are believed to be remnants of degenerated axon terminals. Because neurite plaques are much more
common in the aged Alzheimer's brain than in the normal aged brain, they are considered a specific marker for Alzheimer's
disease. A number of neurite plaques are shown in in Figure 10.4.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter10.html 3/9

1/7/25, 10:09 AM CNS Aging and Alzheimer's Disease (Section 4, Chapter 10) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
Figure 10.4
Lower (left) and higher power (right) photomicrographs of senile plaques from an AD
brain.
Loss of dendritic branches and spines. As occurs in normal aging, a characteristic feature of AD is a decrease in the
number and branches of cortical dendrites and spines. This predicts a decreased synaptic innervation of cortical neurons. In
AD there is a large decrease in dendritic branches and spines.
10.5 Diagnosis of Definite AD
With the above pathological features in mind, the physician examines the CNS biopsy or on autopsy to determine the presence of
these histopathologic features. Following the examination of the histological sections, the age related criteria in Table I are used to
establish the diagnosis of Definite AD. The areas where plaques and tangle are most abundant are usually the temporal- and neo-
cortex. The histopathologic analysis requires multiple CNS samples for microscopic examination. Because these structures also
occur in normal aging, the diagnosis of AD depends on the number of pathological features based on the patient’s age; with older
age, more inclusions are required before AD is indicated. Other regions examined are the amygdala, hippocampus, basal ganglia,
substantia nigra, cerebellum, and spinal cord.
Table I
Morphological Observations Necessary to Confirm
Alzheimer's Disease at Various Ages
Age Number of Plaques & Tangles
(years) (in one sq. mm of neocortical tissue)
<50 must exceed 2-5/field
50-65 at least 8/field
66-75 at least 10/field
>75 more than 15/field
10.6 Classification of Alzheimer's Disease
AD, in few cases, has been found to be associated with specific families. Although this happens rather infrequently, it has led to the
classification of AD as either familial or sporadic.
Sporadic AD refers to disease that has no clear-cut genetic basis. It is the majority of AD seen in the general population. However,
a genetic predisposition may exist for even this disease, as will be discussed at the end of this chapter.
Familian AD (FAD) refers to an inherited disease that is associated with families. Several examples of AD mapped to a specific
gene exist. Based on the typical age of onset, familial AD has been sub-classified as early onset and late onset. Both of these will
also be presented in more detail at the end of this chapter.
10.7 Observations Concerning the Causes (Etiology) of Alzheimer's Disease
Historically, several types of observations have been made concerning the cause of AD. Five of these include: 1) abnormally low
levels of neurotransmitters, 2) accumulation of a pathological protein, β amyloid, 3) hyperphosphorylation of a microtubule
associated protein, tau, 4) products of the presenilin genes and 5) alterations in a cholesterol shuttling protein (ApoE4). Several of
these have been analyzed in genetic studies.
1. Neurotransmitters. The patterns of biochemical loss in Alzheimer's disease reflect specific involvement of discrete neuronal
populations rather than an overall general deterioration. Some of the neurotransmitters that deteriorate include:
acetylcholine
norepinephrine
serotonin
somatostatin
ACH Hypothesis. Among these, the neurotransmitter to receive the greatest attention has been acetylcholine.
Morphological and biochemical evidence has implicated a specific deterioration of the cholinergic system that connects
the midbrain nucleus basalis of Meynert to the cerebral cortex. The location of the cholinergic neurons is shown in Figure
10.5.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter10.html 4/9

1/7/25, 10:09 AM CNS Aging and Alzheimer's Disease (Section 4, Chapter 10) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
Figure 10.5
Cholinergic nerve tracts in the rodent and human brain, pointing out the nucleus basalis of Meynert.
See the nucleus basalis of Meynert slide
2. Beta Amyloid / abnormal protein. An important approach to the study of AD is to analyze the abnormal structures found
in the AD brain. One of the principle proteins present is β amyloid, named for its β pleated confirmation. This protein was
purified, sequenced and an antibody to a synthetic peptide mimicking the sequence produced. The antibody reacts to cerebral
β amyloid and not to other protein in plaques and tangles showing that β amyloid is a constituent of AD neuropathological
structures. Isolation of the cDNA encoding β amyloid revealed a number of important properties of this protein as described
below.
Figure 10.6
Schematic
representation of
Amyloid Precursor
Protein
β amyloid is a 4,000-4,500 MW protein that is part of a larger 79,000 MW protein. The larger protein is called amyloid
precursor protein (APP). Analysis of the hydrophobicity plots predicts that APP spans the cell membrane and extends
into the extracellular space (Fig. 11.6).
A number of observations of the biology of amyloid has lead to the hypothesis that amyloid is the toxic substance that
initiates the pathology of AD. This hypothesis, called the amyloid hypothesis, is based on morphological, biochemical,
and molecular biological evidence that implicates β amyloid as a seminal, causative agent in Alzheimer's disease. The
role of β amyloid in Alzheimer’s disease is based on the following observations:
Amyloid is found in both plaques and tangles and is present in a number of other dementias such as Down's
syndrome. Thus, it is hypothesized to be an essential factor in the cause of degeneration.
Antibodies to β amyloid show pre-amyloid deposits in both Down's syndrome and AD brains. This implies that focal
amyloid deposition may be the early event in plaque formation for both these diseases. A mutation in the gene for
APP is located on chromosome 21. This gene has been identified in several cases of Familial Alzheimer's disease
(FAD). Also, recall that Down’s syndrome patients have three copies of chromosome 21.
Based on the above observations, it is hypothesized that an abnormal proteolytic processing of APP occurs in AD. This
abnormal processing is believed to generate a toxic 40-kDa peptide referred to as β amyloid or Aβ (Figure 10.7). Recent
research has shown that under normal circumstances a proteolytic enzyme, α secretase, cuts APP to produce a normal
biological messenger molecule (Figure 10.7a). However, it appears that in AD, the APP is abnormally proteolyzed by two
other secretases (Figure 10.7b) to produce the abnormal protein, β amyloid (Aβ). These two secretases, termed β and γ
secretase, have been cloned to determine their biology and structural properties. The goal is to generate drugs that can
block the secretases and the initiation or progression of AD. One or the other of these secretases may be the product of
the senilin genes of familial AD. Also a recent hypothesis, based on the observation that zinc or copper facilitates the
formation of insoluble Aβ, is that drugs that chelate these metals will be a good treatment for AD. Clinical trails are
underway examining this hypothesis. Recent (Nature Cell Biology 11, 143-153, 2008) research has shown that there
may be an abnormal clearing of Aβ that is responsible for its accumulation and toxicity. This provides another strategy
for dealing with AD, enhancing the clearance of Aβ.
How Aβ is toxic to cells is not known. One possibility is that it stimulates increased calcium influx, which can lead to cell
death through the hyper-phosphorylation of cytostructural proteins, such as tau (see below). Also, recent evidence
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter10.html 5/9

1/7/25, 10:09 AM CNS Aging and Alzheimer's Disease (Section 4, Chapter 10) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
indicates that Aβ can stimulate the formation of free radicals that may kill neurons. A single methionine in the Aβ
molecule appears to be capable of augmenting free radical formation and neuronal death in neuronal cell cultures. High
levels of antioxidants such as vitamin E protect neurons from this adverse effect.
There is also evidence that Aβ may have normal functions in the brain. It has been shown to be: 1) a specific ligand for
a number of different receptors and other molecules, 2) transported by complex trafficking pathways, 3) modulated in
response to a variety of environmental stressors, and 4) able to induce pro-inflammatory activities. Recent evidence
indicates that Aβ may be an antimicrobial peptide that functions normally as a part of an the innate immune system for
the brain. How these biological functions relate to the possible role of Aβ in AD is not known.
APP
PLAY N C
APP
PLAY
N C
c 2000 UTHSCH
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 10.7a Figure 10.7b
Normal processing of APP. Alzheimer’s processing of APP.
3. Tau protein hypothesis - Molecular research over the past ten years suggests that abnormal processing of tau (hyper-
phosphorylation) may also be an important aspect of AD pathology. (Figure 10.8) Tau is a microtubule associate protein (MAP)
composed of a family of six proteins in mammals. These proteins associate with microtubules in the axons of neurons to
regulate microtubule growth, assembly and cross-linking. In normal CNS, MAPs, other than tau, regulate microtubule function
in dendrites and the cell soma. However in the degenerating neurons in AD patients, 1) tau is found throughout the neuron,
not just in the axon. Further 2) tau is also abnormal in that it is phosphorylated much more extensively in AD than in normal
brain. Finally, 3) the tau within degenerating neurons is often associated with PHF. Thus the hyper-phosphorylation of tau
may be responsible for the altered subcellular distribution of tau and eventual cell death. These observations point to the
abnormal phosphorylation and distribution of tau as an important aspect of the pathology of AD. Importantly, the
demonstration that tau is distributed differently in degenerating neurons in Alzheimer’s disease than in normal
aging has been interpreted to show that Alzheimer’s disease is not merely the end stage of normal aging. One
unifying hypothesis is that tau’s hyperphosphorylation may be induced by the β amyloid.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter10.html 6/9

1/7/25, 10:09 AM CNS Aging and Alzheimer's Disease (Section 4, Chapter 10) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
cAMP
cAMP
++
Ca
++
Ca
cAMP
++
Ca
Figure 10.8
Hyperphosphorylation of tau is hypothesized to underlie
neuronal death.
PLAY
c 2000 UTHSCH
4. Presenilins - Mutations in two additional genes, presenilin-1 (PS-1), located on chromosome 14 and presenilin-2 (PS-2),
located on chromosome, have been determined to be a cause of specific forms of FAD. PS-2 is a close homologue of PS1. To
date 45 different PS-1 mutations and two PS-2 mutations have been identified in FAD and these mutations account for up 50
% of early-onset FAD. A suggested mechanism of the mutated presenilins is that they facilitate the alternative proteolysis of
APP by γ secretase to form Aβ. This conclusion is supported by evidence that mice transfected with only APP developed
plaques late in life, whereas mice with both APP and PS-1 mutations show plaques at a much younger age. This suggests that
PS-1 ratchets up the pace of the AD disease process.
5. ApoE4 hypothesis. ApoE proteins facilitate the shuttling of cholesterol into cells. Researchers at Duke University observed
that a specific variant, ApoE4, is elevated in the CSF of Alzheimer’s patients. This observation triggered biochemical and
genetic studies of ApoE4 and its role in Alzheimer’s disease. As a consequence, the results of several genetic linkage studies
and ApoE4 binding studies linked the ApoE cholesterol shuttling protein to Alzheimer’s disease. These results are:
The apoE4 gene is positively correlated with several classes of Alzheimer's.
Of the three variants of ApoE, the ApoE4 variant predominates in familial Alzheimer’s, whereas the ApoE3 form is most
common in the general population.
A similar genetic skew appears in “sporadic” Alzheimer’s.
The presence of ApoE4 predisposes one to Alzheimer’s. Individuals with two copies of this allele are most likely to contract
Alzheimer’s, and to develop it earlier as shown in Figure 10.9.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter10.html 7/9

1/7/25, 10:09 AM CNS Aging and Alzheimer's Disease (Section 4, Chapter 10) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
Figure 10.9
Alzheimer’s disease age-of-onset curves in relation to ApoE genotype. Re-
plotted data based on illustration originally published in JAMA, 273(5), 1995.
10.8 Summary of the Genetics of Alzheimer’s disease
The current information concerning the causes of AFD indicates that it is a genetically heterogeneous disorder. Although most cases
of Alzheimer's disease do not exhibit familial inheritance, certain genes appear to act as risk factors for AD. Currently, the best
known genetic risk factor for AD is the inheritance of the ε4 allele of the apolipoprotein E on chromosome 19. This gene is
implicated in up to 50% of late-onset sporadic Alzheimer's cases. However, geneticists agree that numerous other genes probably
also act as risk factors or have protective effects that influence the development of late onset AD. Over 400 genes have been tested
for association with late-onset sporadic AD. There is also considerable evidence that Aβ and APP on chromosome 21 play an
important role in the etiology of AD. The evidence for genetic basis in FAD and a role for Aβ in sporadic AD include the following: 1)
Individuals with Down’s syndrome have three copies of chromosome 21 and consequently make large amount of APP. 2) Down’s
syndrome patients exhibit brain pathology virtually identical to AD and suffer dementia. 2) A direct linkage has been made between
chromosome 21 and a subset of FAD. 3) In addition a direct linkage has been made between mutations in the genes for presenilins
and the facilitation of the abnormal processing of APP to produce Aβ. All of these observations support a role for amaloid in AD
pathology.
10.9 Role of Risk Factors and the Environment
Several clear risk factors exist for AD. These include being female, family history of neurodegenerative diseases, less education and
less intellectually demanding jobs. How these factors fit into the etiology of AD is not known.
Table II
Type
IV. Late-onset
I. Early-onset II. Early-onset III. Early-onset
Familian and
Familial Familial I Familial
Sporadic
Chromosome 21 14 1 19
Gene APP PS-1 PS-2 ApoE4
Genetic Effect Direct Linkage Direct Linkage Direct Linkage Risk Factor
Typical Age of Onset Allele-dependent
50's 40's 50's
(years) (see Figure 10.5)
Incidence Among All
Volga-German
Alzheimer's Disease <20 known families <2% >95%
kindreds
Cases
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D
The following is evidence that Alzheimer’s disease is not merely exaggerated normal biological
aging. Only Alzheimer’s disease brains have:
A. neuritic plaques
B. neurofibrillary tangles
C. hypo-phosphorylated tau
D. tau distributed throughout the neurons
Question 2 A B C D
“Sporadic” Alzheimer’s disease has
A. primarily a genetic cause
B. primarily a environmental cause
C. primarily an infectious cause
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter10.html 8/9

1/7/25, 10:09 AM CNS Aging and Alzheimer's Disease (Section 4, Chapter 10) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
D. a combination of genetic, environmental, and infectious causes
Question 3 A B C D E
The diagnosis “Definite Alzheimer’s Disease” is established by:
A. autopsy of the patient’s brain
B. behavioral analysis
C. PET analysis
D. CAT analysis
E. MRI analysis
Question 4 A B C D E
Which of the following is not implicated via direct linkage to “Familial" Alzheimer’s Disease?
A. ApoE4
B. APP
C. Presenilin 1 (PS-1)
D. Presenilin 2 (PS-2)
E. All of the above are implicated by direct linkage.
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter10.html 9/9



1/7/25, 10:09 AM Higher Cortical Functions: Association and Executive Processing (Section 4, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbo…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 4: Homeostasis and Higher Brain Functions
Search
Chapter 9: Higher Cortical Functions: Association and Executive Processing
Anthony Wright, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
Last Review 20 Oct 2020
Higher-order integrative cortical areas, called association areas, intervene between the sensory inputs and motor outputs.
Hierarchical organization of the cortex was proposed in the 1870s by the famous British neurologist, John Hughlings Jackson. These
association areas are the site of cognitive processing and are the focal areas in the rapidly developing field of cognitive
neuroscience.
Primary
Primary motor
somatosensory
Premotor cortex cortex cortex
Somatosensory
unimodal association
Anterior cortex
association
area Posterior
association
area
Primary visual
cortex
Limbic
association Visual unimodal
area Primary association cortex
auditory Auditory unimodal
Show all
cortex association cortex
Figure 9.1
Locations of primary, unimodal, and multimodal (Anterior, Limbic,
Posterior) areas. Select any label to highlight.
Three multimodal association areas will be discussed in conjunction with three unimodal association areas and three primary
sensory areas.
1. Limbic association area
Located in the anterior-ventral portion of the temporal lobe, the parahippocampal gyrus.
Links emotion with many sensory inputs.
Important in learning and memory.
2. Posterior association area
Located at the junction of occipital, temporal and parietal lobes.
Links information from primary and unimodal sensory areas
Important in perception and language.
3. Anterior association area
Located in the prefrontal cortex.
Links information from other association areas.
Important in memory, planning, and higher-order concept formation.
Three unimodal association areas are located adjacent to their respective primary sensory cortical areas as shown in the
figure. The general principle to be learned here is that as one gets further away from the primary sensory areas the
associative functions become more general.
Sensory information is processed and sent from receptors along parallel pathways through primary sensory cortex and unimodal
association cortex to the posterior multimodal association cortex of each hemisphere—the posterior parietal and temporal cortices.
The posterior multimodal association cortex is highly connected to the anterior association areas which in turn are responsible for
conceptual cognitive functions and planning motor actions.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter09.html 1/9

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Higher Cortical Functions: Association and Executive Processing (Section 4, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbo…
After planning motor actions in the anterior association area, the actual processing of the motor response output is the reverse of
processing in the sensory (input) system. The premotor cortex is rostral to the motor cortex—Brodmann’s areas 6 and 8.
Figure 9.2
Flow of information in the motor system is the reverse of that in the sensory systems.
Retrieval of information that has been learned apparently is also a reverse of the paths and structures used in storing this
information.
Figure 9.3
Schematic of successively
higher-order processing of
sensory input information and
the reverse in the motor
hierarchy leading to output
responses that interact with
the environment. (Adapted
from Fuster, J.M. The
Prefrontal Cortex: Anatomy,
Physiology, and
Neuropsychology of the
Frontal Lobe, 3rd ed.
Philadelphia: Lippincott-
Raven, 1997.)
9.1 Posterior Association Area
Agnosia
Damage to posterior association areas also sometimes including parts of the unimodal association areas can result in agnosia, a
Greek word meaning “not knowing.” Lesions of the visual posterior association area can result in the inability to recognize familiar
faces or learn new faces while at the same time leave other aspects of visual recognition intact—a deficit called prosopagnosia.
These patients can identify a face as a face, its parts, and specific emotions from facial expressions, but they cannot identify a face
as a particular person. They often cannot recognize relatives such as parents or children and in some instances cannot recognize
their own face. They have not lost knowledge about their close relatives and friends because they use sound of the voice and other
cues to recognize them. Lesions causing prosopagnosia are always bilateral on the inferior surface of both occipital lobes and
extend forward to the inner surface of the temporal lobes.
Patients with lesions in the posterior multimodal association cortex (i.e., posterior parietal cortex) can perceive and draw objects,
but they cannot name them—a deficit called associative agnosia. They haven’t forgotten the names of these objects because they
can correctly name them by touch. Other damage to the occipital lobes and surrounding region can render patients unable to draw
objects, but remarkably can still name them—a deficit called apperceptive agnosia.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter09.html 2/9

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Higher Cortical Functions: Association and Executive Processing (Section 4, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbo…
ASSOCIATIVE model image LEFT DAMAGE model image
w
APPERECPTIVE RIGHT DAMAGE www w
w w
wwwww
w w
w w
Figure 9.4 Figure 9.5
Patients with associative agnosia can copy drawings, but Animation showing how a patient with left or right TPJ
cannot name the objects, while patients with damage might attempt to copy a drawing.
apperceptive agnosia are unable to copy drawings, but
can name the objects.
There are other cases where lesions in similar areas of the right and left hemisphere produce almost complementary perceptual
differences. Right hemisphere damage disrupts perception of global objects, while left hemisphere damage disrupts percept of local
objects. This is found only in acute stages immediately after a stroke and only with lesions centered in the temporal-parietal
junction (TPJ).
9.2 Contralateral Neglect
LEFT VISUAL NEGLECT model image
Figure 9.6
Animation showing how a patient with right posterior
parietal lesions shows left visual neglect.
Agnosias of right posterior parietal visuocortex are some of the most remarkable. The multimodal posterior association area
receives inputs from the visual and auditory systems and from the hippocampus. They result from an inability to perceive objects
despite normally functioning sensory systems. These patients ignore things on the left including the left halves of objects and the
left half of their own body. This is called contralateral neglect syndrome.
Contralateral neglect is a deficit in the self-image on the left side of their body and a deficit in perceiving the world on the left side.
Typically, patients suffering from contralateral neglect syndrome will have paralysis on their left side.
Some patients will not wash or dress their left side—personal neglect syndrome. This neglect may extend to disowning the left side
of their body. They will make remarks such as “Who put this arm in my bed” when referring to their left arm.
The neglect can extend from their personal space to the world around them. They may draw a flower, for example, with the petals
only on the right-hand side, or clock numbers only on the right-hand side, etc.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter09.html 3/9

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Higher Cortical Functions: Association and Executive Processing (Section 4, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbo…
A little thought will convince you that it is not a sensory problem. Not just the right half of all objects in the environment have input
into such a patients sensory system. Most objects are made up of multiple parts. You can think of these parts as objects. So for
example, each petal of the flower is an object. They don’t “see” just the right half of each petal. This is the infinite regress problem.
To show you how complicated and complex this visual neglect problem can become there was a study of a group of visual-neglect
patients in Milan, Italy. They were asked in the hospital examining room to imagine the well-known public square, the Piazza del
Duomo. They were told that they should imagine that they were facing the cathedral. They were then asked to recall all of the
buildings on the square. They recalled only the buildings on their (imagined) right. Then they were told that they were standing on
the steps of the cathedral, and imagine that they were facing in the opposite direction. Once again, they were asked to recall all of
the buildings on the square. What they did was to recall all of the buildings that they had failed to recall during their first recall
because the buildings that were previously on their left are now on their imagined right. Remember this is all in their imagination—
their memory.
Figure 9.7
Piazza del Duomo cathedral in Milan, Italy.
This is dramatic evidence of a processing deficit. These patients’ memory of the Piazza del Duomo is complete; they don’t have
memory deficits about any portion of the square. They also have complete access to their memory of the square. But depending
upon their imagined perspective they have a deficit in recalling objects on the left side of their frame of reference. Furthermore,
they are apparently unaware of this deficit. Their frame of reference is centered with respect to their body, in memory as well as in
real life. Apparently, memories like real world scenes are accessed through the contralateral hemisphere. It is not that the
memories were laid down with objects on the left missing because they grew up knowing this square long before their brain lesions
occurred. This raises issues of consciousness, self-awareness, executive control of memory.
To further complicate matters unilateral visual neglect can be centered with respect to the object instead of the patient’s body. A
patient with object-centered unilateral visual neglect. Left: patient attends to examiner’s left hand even when rotated. Right:
patient neglects examiner’s right hand even when examiner’s body is rotated 90 degrees.
Bilateral parietal damage can produce what is called Balint’s syndrome. This is an interesting syndrome because rather than
neglecting both sides of objects and seeing nothing as one might expect with bilateral hemifield neglect, they see one object at a
time—simultaneous agnosia. These patients report that an object appears automatically and is replaced at random with another
object and they have no control over what object will be perceived. These patients have ADL problems included getting lost,
inability to grasp items and they cannot eat, dress, or move around a room without assistance. They can, however, correctly touch
parts of their own bodies.
9.3 Limbic Association Area
The limbic association area receives information from virtually every other association area and therefore can relate all the stimuli
of an event, including its emotional context. The emotion associated with an event can determine whether or how long it is
remembered. This is important for survival of all organisms. Indeed, this is what is meant by learning. You can’t have learning
without memory. When hungry it is a great relief to find food and then one is more likely to remember the food place later. When
one narrowly escapes danger, one is more likely to avoid such predators and places where they reside. The patient HM had his
limbic association areas removed bilaterally, he could not form any new explicit memories which rely on context memory, including
place, time, and emotion.
9.4 Anterior Association Area
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter09.html 4/9

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Higher Cortical Functions: Association and Executive Processing (Section 4, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbo…
Figure 9.8
Schematic illustration of path of tamping
iron through Phineas Gage’s brain.
The anterior association area is in the frontal lobes. It is rostral to the postcentral gyri, Rolandic fissure, and premotor areas. It has
Sylvian fissure as its posterior boundary. It is referred to as prefrontal cortex.
Early evidence of the role of prefrontal cortex came from the case of Phineas T. Gage. Gage was a foreman on railroad construction
in the middle of the 19th century. He was reliable, well organized, and hardworking He was tamping in an explosive in a hole drilled
into rock with a 13 pound, 3½ foot long iron bar. The charge unexpectedly exploded as he was packing in the explosive charge.
What happened was that the tamping rod blew out of the hole and went through the front of his head, destroying large portions of
his prefrontal cortex. After he recovered physically (remarkably only a few weeks), his personality had changed. Co-workers
reported that “Gage was not Gage.” He was unreliable. His actions were impulsive with little regard for consequences. He became
an alcoholic and drifter.
Prefrontal lobotomies were performed in the first half of the twentieth century to relieve psychotic symptoms. These have now been
replaced with drug therapy. With a unilateral or bilateral prefrontal lobotomy there is a lack of ability remember and relate things
over time. Delayed reward has a greater detrimental effect on learning. Attention span and ability to concentrate are greatly
diminished. Abstract reasoning largely disappears. The prefrontal cortex receives massive inputs from the sensory association
cortices (somatosensory, visual and auditory) and also from the dorsomedial nucleus of the thalamus. Lesions of the dorsomedial
nucleus of the thalamus can produce many of the same symptoms as from prefrontal lobotomy.
Figure 9.9
Major fiber bundles that interconnect association areas.
The prefrontal cortex is subdivided into three areas.
1. Dorsal (superior) prefrontal cortex
2. Medial (surrounding the principal sulcus) prefrontal cortex
3. Ventral-orbitofrontal (or inferior) cortex
A. B.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter09.html 5/9

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Higher Cortical Functions: Association and Executive Processing (Section 4, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbo…
Figure 9.10
Subdivisions of the prefrontal cortex of the monkey brain.
Prefrontal syndrome (or frontal syndrome) in patients usually refers to damage of the dorsal (superior) prefrontal association area.
Most research in the dorsal prefrontal area is concentrated within the dorsolateral prefrontal area. This is the area (46) in the above
diagram just dorsal to the principal sulcus (Figure 9.10A). This is a very important area for many higher-order cognitive abilities.
The dorsolateral prefrontal area along with the cingulate cortex are involved in attentional processing, planning, rule learning and
memory. When trying to perform arithmetic, for example, the patient may begin successfully on successive subtractions of 7 from
100 but then inexplicably shift and say: “100, 93, 93, 73…63 instead of 100, 93, 86, 79, 72 etc. When sequences are being
learned, the dorsolateral prefrontal area and the cingulate cortex are highly active. But once learning is complete and automated
these areas are no longer active.
Many neurons in the dorsolateral prefrontal area and those in the principal sulcus itself (i.e., dorsal and medial prefrontal cortex)
mediate memory about WHERE an object is located. These neurons receive inputs from a dorsal pathway through the posterior
parietal cortex. Recordings in monkeys show that “where” neurons respond only to stimuli in a particular position in the visual field
and continue to fire during a delay period—presumably memory for the event. When occasionally they stop firing during the delay
period, this usually signals that the monkey has forgotten the location. Eye-tracking devices are used to record where the monkey
is looking, and the monkey is trained to look towards a particular remembered location.
In contrast to the dorsolateral prefrontal area, neurons in the small area (46) in Figure 9.10A just ventral to the principal sulcus
mediate memory about WHAT the object is, its shape and color. This is a target of the ventral visual pathway through the inferior
temporal lobe.
Principal
sulcus
Intraparietal
sulcus
Figure 9.11
Output destinations of parietal and prefrontal association areas to limbic
system areas (1) on the medial surface, superior temporal cortices (2) on the
lateral surface, and subcortical areas (3).
Press the labels to see the pathways.
The orbitofrontal cortex and the medial prefrontal cortex have direct connections to the amygdala and cingulate cortex of the limbic
system and thus provide the emotional component to the planned behavior and memory.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter09.html 6/9

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Higher Cortical Functions: Association and Executive Processing (Section 4, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbo…
The dominant neurotransmitter in the prefrontal region is dopamine. Dopamine depletion can create lesion like symptoms.
Disturbances of the dopaminergic system are thought to contribute to symptoms of schizophrenics and many schizophrenics have
hypofunction of the prefrontal cortical regions. Symptoms such as being controlled by alien voices suggest a dysfunction of the
executive control system in schizophrenics.
For example, if schizophrenic patients are tested on the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test blood flow to the prefrontal areas is much less
than normal individuals. Blood flow to the prefrontal areas is shown to be a functional part of performing this task accurately
because when schizophrenics are rewarded for their correct responses blood flow increases much more than it does for normal and
they show improved performance.
Further evidence for the close interaction between the prefrontal cortex and cingulate cortex is that neuroimaging of schizophrenics
shows impaired activation of the cingulated cortex in cognitive tasks and postmortem histological analysis has shown abnormalities
in the cingulated cortex of schizophrenics.
Some Final Thoughts on the Lateralization of Cognitive Function
Another way to determine whether or not functions are lateralized to one hemisphere or represented in both hemispheres is to test
split-brain patients, patients that have had their corpus callosum transected. Sectioning the corpus callosum is a last resort
treatment of intractable epilepsy. Stimuli can then be input to only one hemisphere without the other being aware of these stimuli.
Patients can be tested to see how they process these stimuli.
Figure 9.12 Figure 9.13
An object in the left visual Split-brain patient looks in the center of the screen and indicates what he
field excites areas of the saw. He can name the object or select an object by touch and pointing.
right hemisphere because
signals from the left nasal
retina are transferred
contralaterally and those
from the right retina are
transferred ipsilaterally.
Stimuli are presented to only one hemisphere tachistoscopically. Patients focus on a point straight in the middle of a screen. If the
stimulus appears on the left, it goes to the right hemisphere. If the stimulus appears on the right, it goes to the left hemisphere.
So, in response to an cone presented on the right (left hemisphere), the patient says “cone.” But when presented on the left, the
patient denies seeing anything, and when pressed to give a response, the patient confabulates. So, when the cone stimulus is on
the left, is the patient incapable of recognizing the visual stimulus as a cone?
Actually, the patient is capable of recognizing the stimulus as a cone. But you have to be clever to show this ability. The patient can
correctly choose, by feel, the correct object. Or the patient can correctly identify it by pointing to it, but only with his left hand.
One might say that this is just matching—even cross modality (visual to haptic) matching—but not language. But you can convince
yourself that this is really language because, if you flash the letters D-O-G to the right hemisphere, patients can pick out the model
of a dog---only with their left hands, of course.
Other results from split-brain patients have shown that for most people, the left hemisphere is dominant for mathematics as well as
language.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter09.html 7/9

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Higher Cortical Functions: Association and Executive Processing (Section 4, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbo…
Figure 9.14
Some hemispheric functional specializations from studies of split-brain
patients. (Adapted from Sperry, R.W. Lateral specialization in the
surgically separated hemispheres. In: Schmitt, F.O., Worden, F.G.
The Neurosciences: Third Study Program, MIT Press, 1974.)
The right hemisphere is dominant for music, face recognition, and anything to do with spatial relationships.
For example, even right-handed patients after corpus callosum resectioning (split brain) are better able to draw with their left
hands than with their right hands because it is the right hemisphere that controls the left hand.
Thus, the right hemisphere has some functions that are superior to those of the left hemisphere, and the right hemisphere is not
just like the left hemisphere without language. Other examples of superiority of the right hemisphere would be that split-brain
patients can fit wooden blocks together of different colors to make a pattern better with their left hands than with their right hands,
again showing that the right hemisphere is superior in spatial-perceptual tasks.
In conclusion, functions of the brain that are localized to specific brain regions have had considerable clinical importance.
Localization of function can explain why certain syndromes are characteristic of disease in specific brain regions. Nevertheless, no
part of the brain works in isolation. Each and every part of the brain works in concert with every other part. When a part of the
brain is removed, the resulting behavior may reflect more about the adjusted capacities of the remaining “parts” than the removed
part.
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
A 43-year old cerebral vascular accident patient was diagnosed as having persistent unilateral spatial
agnosia or "visual neglect". What cerebral region was most likely involved?
A. Non-dominant parietal-occipital cortex
B. Dominant parietal-occipital cortex
C. Dorsal prefrontal cortex
D. Dominant temporal-occipital cortex
E. Non-dominant temporal-occipital cortex
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter09.html 8/9

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Higher Cortical Functions: Association and Executive Processing (Section 4, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbo…
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter09.html 9/9



1/7/25, 10:09 AM Higher Cortical Functions: Language (Section 4, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 4: Homeostasis and Higher Brain Functions
Search
Chapter 8: Higher Cortical Functions: Language
Anthony Wright, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
Last Review 20 Oct 2020
A major issue of the topic of higher cortical function is the degree to which mental and cognitive functions are located in specific
brain regions.
We begin by looking at the neuroscience of language. Language is one of the most elaborate cognitive behaviors. The pioneer of
brain localization of language function was a French neurologist, Pierre Paul Broca, working around the time of our civil war—1861.
Broca extended a theory proposed by Gall (Franz Joseph Gall) that the cortex was divided into 35 or more regions for attributes
such as hope, generosity, and secretiveness. According to Gall, these were cortical “organs.” They grew with use, much as muscles
did with exercise, and caused bumps and ridges on the skull. Thus, was born the science of phrenology. Hundreds and thousands of
skulls were collected and bumps were correlated to attributes and personalities of those individuals. From a study of these
correlations, so-called experts would go out into the population and “read” the bumps of living people to divine their attributes and
personalities—all for a fee, of course.
Broca’s work differed from Gall’s. Broca argued for examining brains of people with clinical disorders for lesions that might then
indicate the brain region responsible for the disorder. Thus was born the field of neuropsychology which flourishes today and has
provided much of what we know about localized function in the brain.
Figure 8.1
Above, the four lobes of the cerebral cortex. Click any label to see
that area highlighted.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter08.html 1/11

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Higher Cortical Functions: Language (Section 4, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
Figure 8.2
Cortical regions of some of the major language areas and pathways.
Click any label to see that area highlighted.
In 1861, Broca described a patient named Leborgne who could understand language but could not speak. He had no motor deficits
to account for his inability to speak. He could whistle, utter isolated words, and sing the lyrics of a melody. Postmortem
examination of Leborgne’s brain showed a lesion in the posterior region of the frontal lobe. This region is now called Broca’s area. A
few years later, in 1876, Karl Wernicke described another type of aphasia. This aphasia, or language disorder, involved a failure to
comprehend language rather than a failure to speak. Broca’s patient could understand language but not speak, whereas Wernicke’s
patient could speak but not understand language. Location of the lesion in Wernicke’s patient was different from Broca’s patient. It
was in at the junction of the temporal, parietal and occipital lobes—now called Wernicke’s area. The junction of temporal, parietal,
and occipital lobes is an important area to remember.
Wernicke proposed that language involves separate motor and sensory programs located in different cortical regions. The motor
program, located in Broca’s area was suitably situated in front of the motor area that controls the mouth, tongue, and vocal cords.
The sensory program, located in Wernicke’s area, was suitably surrounded by the posterior association cortex that integrates
auditory, visual, and somatic sensations.
Wernicke’s model is still referred to today. According to this model, initial processing of spoken or written words takes place in the
primary and unimodal sensory areas for vision and audition. This information is then conveyed to the angular gyrus of the posterior
association area. This was thought to be the area where either written or spoken words were transformed into a common neural
representation. Then, these representations were thought to be transferred to Wernicke’s area where they were recognized as
language and associated with meaning. Without meaning, there can be no language comprehension. These neural representations
along with their associated meanings are then passed along, via the arcuate fasiculus, to Broca’s area where it is transformed into a
motor representation that allows for speech.
From the Wernicke model, Wernicke correctly predicted a third type of aphasia—conduction aphasia. Comprehension and speech
articulation are spared but these two areas were thought to be disconnected. Patients can comprehend and speak, but they omit
parts of words and substitute incorrect sounds. They are aware of their errors but are unable to correct them.
More recent results, such as those from functional imaging, have shown that the Wernicke model is an over simplification. There
are, as we will see, other brain areas responsible for different aspects of language. We will briefly consider different aspects that
constitute language before considering brain areas that control these different language aspects.
8.1 What is Language?
Language is communication through words or symbols for words. Words are an association between a sound and meaning. By 6
years of age children understand about 13,000 words and by the end of high school about 60,000 words. Thus, children connect a
new sound to a meaning about every 90 waking minutes.
8.2 Is Language Innate or Learned?
Language is considered to develop in five phases.
1-4 months Cooing vowel sounds
strings of consonant-vowel syllables
5-10 months Babbling
(e.g., mamamama)
10-15 months First Words —consistent object labels
18-24 months Two Word Utterances
meaningful pairs of words
>25 months Meaningful Speech
The issue is whether this development is innate or learned, and was most prominently raised as an issue by seminal books
published in the late 1950s by Skinner and Chomsky. In support of innate development of language, all cultures learn language.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter08.html 2/11

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Higher Cortical Functions: Language (Section 4, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
Even children together in a social environment but deprived of any developed language—invent their own language. In support of
learned language, young children deprived of language (e.g., parents are deaf or depraved) acquire language fully if learning takes
place before puberty. If after puberty, they are very inept at language. If an infant has its whole left hemisphere removed, it will
develop language fully in the right hemisphere. If adults have left hemisphere removed all language skills disappear forever. Finally,
young children acquire several languages perfectly, whereas later in life it is much more difficult and with telltale signs of accents
and grammatical errors. Thus, from the nurture standpoint there appears to be a critical period for language acquisition. From a
neurological standpoint the developing brain is plastic with regard to language for several years.
Figure 8.3
Current source density measures showing activity flowing into the head
(sinks) in purple and activity flowing out of the head (sources) in orange
for grammatical violations of English phrases. Early English learners
show highly left-lateralized activations, but later learners show
increasingly greater bilateral activation. (Adapted from illustration in
Neville, H.J. and Bavelier, D., Specificity and plasticity in
neurocognitive development in humans. In: Gazzaniga, M. The New
Cognitive Neurosciences, 2nd ed. MIT Press, 2000.)
8.3 When Did Language Evolve?
If language is innate then we can ask: When did it evolve? Language may have evolved as long ago as 2 million years ago. One of
the things about language is that it is lateralized to an area called Broca’s area in the left hemisphere. Even the skulls of Homo
habilis, a distant ancestor that lived about 3 million years ago, show an enlargement in the region of Broca’s area of the left
hemisphere. If language evolved, should not a common evolutionary ancestor have passed this ability along to apes? Possibly, but
on the other hand the division between apes and 6-8 million years ago may have allowed sufficient time for a separate
development language in the evolutionary branch leading to man. One way to answer this question is to identify language in some
other species?
8.4 Is Language Unique to Humans?
We can all think of language-like behavior from our pets. Dogs, for example, understand words like “come”, “dinner”, “fetch”, etc.
But is this language?
Parrots have been taught to “talk.” One parrot, Alex, can name, request, or refuse more than 100 objects. When Alex is shown five
keys or five corks and is asked verbally by his trainer, “How many?”, Alex answers verbally “five.” He can combine the concepts of
number with color and can correctly answer the question, “How many blue key?” Alex knows the concept of same and different.
When presented with a pair of objects that differ in matter (wood, plastic, metal), shape (triangle, square, etc.), or color (red,
yellow, etc.) and asked “What’s different?” Alex will then “say” the correct answer. Alternatively, a blue wooden square and a red
wooden triangle might be presented with the question “What’s same?” and Alex will answer “wood.” Alex can also be presented with
novel shapes, colors, or matter and be highly accurate. But, is this language?
Finally, some of the great apes (gorillas, chimpanzees) have been taught symbols or tokens to represent objects and actions and
others American Sign Language. These are hand signs used by deaf people, related to the hand signs used by the Native American
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter08.html 3/11

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Higher Cortical Functions: Language (Section 4, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
Indian peoples. In either case they have learned the meaning of several hundred signs or symbols. Is this language?
The answer is probably not. They learn by rote behavior that if they want to get the treat (e.g., apple) that they have to put the
prefix “Give me” before making the sign for “apple.” Apparently, they do not learn the meaning of the phrase “Give me.” What
evidence would be necessary to show that they did learn the meaning? Related is that the word strings of sentences that these
apes make do not increase with training as they do with young children.
This then brings up the question: If this is not language, then what aspect of language is missing? The answer is grammar.
Figure 8.4
fMRI brain images showing areas of increased blood flow when normal read English
sentences, congenitally deaf ASL signers read English sentences, and congenitally deaf
ASL signers view sentences in ASL. Hover over any subtitles to highlight the pathway.
(Adapted from illustration in Neville, H.J. and Bavelier, D., Specificity and plasticity
in neurocognitive development in humans. In: Gazzaniga, M. The New Cognitive
Neurosciences, 2nd ed. MIT Press, 2000.)
8.5 Language Contains Grammar
If language is communication through words, then the next question is how are these words associated to provide this
communication. The answer, of course, is grammar. Grammar is the rules that allow thoughts to be expressed in words and words
connected into sentences when speaking and comprehending. Language is not how people ought to talk; it is how they do talk. For
example, “ain’t” communicates as well as “isn’t.”
Grammar can be subdivided into morphology, phonology, prosody, and syntax.
Morphology specifies the rules for combining words into longer words by adding prefixes and suffixes so, for example, the
subject and predicate will agree.
Phonology specifies the rules for combining sound elements and phonemes into words. The sound elements do not have
meaning in themselves, e.g., the letters D-O-G has a different meaning from the reverse G-O-D.
Prosody is the pattern of intonation and stress that for example allows us to distinguish questions from statements.
Syntax specifies how words are to be combined into phrases and sentences so that the meaning will be clear. An unclear
example would be the line from Animal Crackers by Groucho Marx: “I once shot an elephant in my pajamas. How he got into
my pajamas I’ll never know.”
8.6 Disorders of Language: The Aphasias
Aphasia is a language disorder. Such disorders revealed areas of the brain critical for language.
What makes language special in terms of associating its function with specific brain areas is that language is lateralized to the left
hemisphere. If it were represented in both hemispheres then brain damage would be less likely to reveal aphasia because the other
undamaged hemisphere would just take over language function.
Language is lateralized to the left hemisphere in about 96% of the population. This percentage is somewhat less for left-handed
than right-handed people.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter08.html 4/11

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Higher Cortical Functions: Language (Section 4, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
How was lateralization of language discovered? At least four lines of evidence have been important: 1) Neuropsychological studies
of patients who suffered stroke, head injuries, herpes encephalitis, and degenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s and Pick’s
disease; 2) functional imaging studies of normal individuals; 3) electrical stimulation of patients undergoing neurosurgery; 4) split-
brain patients.
Continued work on the neuropsychology of language disorders from patients with lesions and from stimulation studies of patients’
brains prior and during neurosurgery, has greatly elaborated on the Wernicke model of language. For example, Wernicke’s area has
been subdivided into different functions. Lesions of the frontal-temporal area produce lexical deficits—problems in understanding
meaning. Lesions of the parietal-temporal region produce syntactical deficits—problems in relating words in sentences.
8.7 Modern Framework
Implementation system: Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas along with areas of the insular cortex and basal ganglia analyze incoming
speech in terms of phonemes and other grammar.
Mediational system: Areas of the temporal, parietal, and frontal association cortices that surround the implementation system.
The mediational system fosters communication between the implementation system and conceptual system.
Conceptual system: Areas distributed throughout the association cortices that are important in learning, memory, and conceptual
knowledge. These are associative areas considered in the next lecture, Higher Order Cortical Function: Association and Executive
Areas.
Middle frontal gyrus
Inferior frontal gyrus
Precentral gyrus
Postcentral gyrus
Supromarginal gyrus
SPL
Angular gyrus
Lateral occipital gyri Figure 8.5
Inferior temporal gyrus Major gyri of the human
Middle temporal gyrus cerebral hemisphere (O-
Superior temporal gyrus opercular, Or-orbital, T-
triangular, SPL-superior
Orbital gyri
Gyrus rectus parietal lobule). Select
Superior frontal gyrus any label to highlight the
Cingulate gyrus gyrus.
Paracentral lobule
Precuneus
Cuneus
Lingual gyrus
Inferior temporal gyrus
Occipitotemporal gyrus
Parahippocampal gyrus
The different language and association areas are not as uniform in function as once thought. They have been subdivided, several
times in some cases. It becomes awkward and imprecise to refer to these different brain areas in terms of lobes, sulci, and gyri.
Many researchers use Brodmann’s numbering scheme. Korbinian Brodmann, a German anatomist, was inspired by Broca’s and
Wernicke’s discoveries. At the turn of the century, Brodmann used cortical cytoarchitecture, the common appearance of neurons
within the cortex, to identify 52 distinct areas.
Figure 8.6
Brodmann’s areas based upon the similar appearance of cells and cell layers of the cerebral cortex. For
example, sensory areas have prominent granule cell layers (IV), whereas motor areas have prominent
output layers (V). (see enlarged version)
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter08.html 5/11

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Higher Cortical Functions: Language (Section 4, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
(From Brodmann, K. Vergleichende Lokalisation lehre der Grosshirnrinde in ihren Prinzipien dargestellt auf
Grund des Zellenbaues, Leipzig, 1909, J.A. Barth)
8.8 Broca Aphasia
Broca aphasia is damage to the inferior left frontal gyrus, which are Brodmann’s areas 44 and 45 including underlying white matter,
insula and basal ganglia.
In many casual conversations, Broca aphasics appear normal in comprehension. Their speech, however, is obviously impaired.
Speech is slow. Articulation is impaired and melodic intonation (Prosody) is lacking. The difficulty is not so much in pronunciation of
individual sounds as in transitions from one sound to another sound. Thus, there is not a smooth articulation of flowing speech. In
severe cases, perseveration of motor elements may be so great as to prevent pronunciation of simple words. For example, a Broca
aphasic might say “2…2…2…2…want to…to…to…go…go…go…home.”
So far, this is according to the Wernicke model. But the normal comprehension is largely an illusion. Since most communication is
with simple sentences, Broca aphasics make sense out of a sentence from only a few key words.
If Broca aphasics are given the sentence: “The apple that the boy is eating is red.” They can understand it. Boys eat apples. Apples
do not eat boys. Apples are red. Boys are not red.
One can, however, show that comprehension is not normal by their inability to understand the sentence: “The boy that the girl is
chasing is tall”. They have difficulty understanding this sentence because either boys or girls can be tall and because boys can
chase girls or girls can chase boys. To understand the sentence you have to understand the phrase “that the girl is chasing” to
identify whom is chasing and who is tall.
This is a grammar deficit, but grammar is by no means totally absent.
Broca aphasics put words in the correct order: subject-verb-object.
They discriminate some grammatical from ungrammatical sentences, for example:
“John was finally kissed by Louise.”
“John was finally kissed Louise.”
The Broca aphasic is apparently able to detect that “John was finally kissed Louise” is ungrammatical because a passive verb (was
kissed) is followed by a direct object.
Where they have problems is linking two elements in the sentence that refer to the same thing. For example, they cannot
accurately discriminate between:
“The woman is outside, isn’t she?”
“The woman is outside, isn’t it?”
The actual problem that Broca aphasics have is thought to be a memory problem. Linking two elements in a sentence requires
keeping the first element in memory. As the gap between elements to be linked becomes longer, these patients have more trouble.
Functional imaging results tend to support this interpretation that Broca aphasics have a short-term memory problem. A subregion
of Broca’s area in normal subjects is more strongly activated (PET imaging) when the gap between elements to be linked is long
rather than short. Some activity is apparently going on in this subregion to keep the elements in memory so that they can be
linked.
8.9 Wernicke Aphasia
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter08.html 6/11

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Higher Cortical Functions: Language (Section 4, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
Wernicke aphasia is damage primarily to Brodmann’s area 22 at the junction of the temporal, parietal, and occipital lobes. This is
the left auditory association cortex.
Speech is fluent, effortless, and melodic, unlike Broca aphasia. The content, however, is often jumbled. A Wernicke aphasic might
say: “Aah dar, the spoon was needed for the telephone.” Even phonemes of individual words can become jumbled. In such cases
the words are unintelligible—and are called neologisms. Such a patient might say: “Aoh confondo…noconfulo...he indent the
confondo.” Wernicke patients have difficulty in word retrieval, and cannot select words that represent what they intend to say—this
is called semantic paraphasia. They may say “headman” for “president.” They also have difficulty comprehending speech of others.
It is useful to think of Wernicke’s area as a brain comprehension center, but as we saw with Broca aphasia there was a loss of
comprehension there too.
Deaf people who sign with American Sign Language (ASL) use these same areas of the brain in the same way as those who speak
language. Lesions in Wernicke area of deaf people loose ability to comprehend sign (ASL). Those with lesions in Broca’s area lose
the ability to make signs.
8.10 Conduction Aphasia
Conduction aphasia is caused primarily by damage to Brodmann’s areas 39 and 40.
Speech production and comprehension are less affected than in Broca or Wernicke aphasias. They cannot repeat sentences
accurately. And they have trouble naming pictures and objects. We will say more about these anomies in the next section.
Conduction aphasia is not produced by disconnection of the arcuate fasiculus alone as Wernicke thought. Damage producing
conduction aphasia, however, does destroy many interconnections among the temporal, parietal, insular and frontal cortices that
are responsible for assembling phonemes into words.
8.11 Transcortical Aphasia
Transcortical aphasia can manifest itself as transcortical motor aphasia and transcortical sensory aphasia. The name transcortical
comes from damage to pathways in addition to damage of language areas. The pathways that are damaged are those that connect
language areas to other parts of the brain.
A way to remember these transcortical aphasias is that the relation between transcortical motor aphasia and transcortical sensory
aphasia is similar to the relation between Broca aphasia and Wernicke aphasia in terms of articulation vs. comprehension,
respectively.
Transcortical motor aphasia is a disconnection of the language areas from areas that initiate and control speech. For example, these
patients have trouble saying “kick” in response to “ball”, even though they use these same words correctly in ordinary speech. They
can, however, repeat even very long sentences.
Transcortical motor aphasia is caused by damage to the left dorsolateral frontal area. This is an area anterior and superior to
Broca’s area.
Transcortical sensory aphasics have fluent speech with impaired comprehension—very much like Wernicke aphasics. But unlike
Wernicke aphasics, they can repeat sentences accurately.
Transcortical sensory aphasia is caused by damage to in the area of the junction of the temporal, parietal, and occipital lobes.
8.12 Global Aphasia
Like the term implies—it’s everything. Global aphasics have all of the disabilities of Broca, Wernicke, and Conduction combined.
They cannot comprehend, repeat sentences, or speak meaningfully. They do, however, speak in expletives, and can recite such
things as the days of the week.
Global aphasia is caused by damage to anterior language region, basal ganglia and insula (as in Broca aphasia), posterior language
region (as in Wernicke aphasia) and superior temporal gyrus (as in conduction aphasia). Typically, this large amount of damage is
caused by infarct in the middle cerebral artery.
8.13 Aphasia Screening
Below are some simulated examples of the capacity for spontaneous speech, comprehension, and repetition in aphasics.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter08.html 7/11

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Higher Cortical Functions: Language (Section 4, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
BROCA
WERNICKE
CONDUCTION
GLOBAL
Figure 8.8
Simulated examples of spoken language deficits in patients suffering with
Broca, Wernicke, Conduction, and Global aphasia. (Adapted from Kertesz,
A. Western Aphasia Battery. San Antonio, 1982, Psychological
Corporation).
AUDITORY COMPREHENSION CAPACITY FOR REPETITION
TYPE OF APHASIA Stimulus: "What kind of trouble Stimulus: "Please repeat this
sentence: The stray animal was
are you having?"
timid."
"Well, um . . . see . . . I um . . .
BROCA "Timid."
not sure."
WERNICKE "I'm having some trouble." "Um ... eh ..."
"The dog was . . . what was that last
word?"
"I can't seem to, my sentences, the
CONDUCTION ("Let me repeat it: The stray
words having trouble saying."
animal was timid.")
"The dog was ... um..."
GLOBAL (no words, only gestures) (no response)
View some video clips of actual aphasia patients:
Broca's aphasia
Wernicke's aphasia
Wernicke's and Broca's aphasia
8.14 Other Language Area
Dysarthria is the inability to control muscles of articulation and produces speech that is weak, flaccid and systematically distorted.
Apraxia is a deficit in planning the desired speech movements and produces errors phonemically similar to the target word, for
example saying “yawyer” for “lawyer” or “cookun” for “cushion”. Apraxia nearly always occurs in Broca’s aphasia and accounts for
the slow effortful style characteristic of Broca’s aphasics. But recent evidence indicates that not all apraxia patients are Broca
aphasics. There are, for example, patients who have apraxia but not Broca aphasia and these patients all have lesions of the insula
(island of cortex) located at the superior tip of the precentral gyrus.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter08.html 8/11

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Higher Cortical Functions: Language (Section 4, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
Figure 8.9
Percentage of overlap of lesions in 25 apraxia patients showing that all (100%) have
insular lesions (yellow area). On the right are 19 control patients without apraxia. They
have lesions surrounding the insula but none have lesions in the insula. (Adapted from
illustration in Dronkers, N.F., Redfern, B.B., and Knight, R.T., The neural
architecture of language disorders. In: Gazzaniga, M. The New Cognitive
Neurosciences, 2nd ed. MIT Press, 2000.)
Specialization of language in the brain may be best shown by different areas of the brain that are active when naming different
kinds of objects. For example, the naming of animals is apparently located in the medial occipital cortex whereas naming of tools
appears to be in the left middle temporal gyrus.
A. B. C. D.
Figure 8.10
A. Medial surface of left B. Medial surfaces of right and C. Lateral surface of left D. Lateral surface of left
hemisphere showing activation left hemispheres showing hemisphere showing active hemisphere showing lesions
in medial occipital lobe when lesions in 28 patients with premotor and middle of 8 patients with impaired
subjects silently named animal impaired recognition and temporal gyrus areas when recognition and naming of
drawings relative to tool naming of animal drawings subjects silently named tool tool drawings.
drawings. drawings relative to animal
drawings.
The active left premotor site in C. apparently is due to subjects imagining that they are grasping or using a tool (e.g., a
hammer). A study has shown that this area is active when subjects imagined grasping a tool shown in a picture with their right
hand. (Adapted from illustration in Tranel, D., Damasio, H., and Damasio A.R. A neural basis for the retrieval of
conceptual knowledge. Neuropsychologia 35(10):1319-1327, 1997.)
8.15 Right Hemisphere Involvement in Language
Prosody
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter08.html 9/11

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Higher Cortical Functions: Language (Section 4, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
Some patients cannot place the appropriate stress, timing or intonation on words in their sentences. This condition is called
prosody.
The right hemisphere controls prosody. It has an organization that roughly parallels the arrangement of Broca’s and Wernicke’s
areas of the left hemisphere. The right inferior frontal gyrus is the site for articulating or producing prosody. The right posterior
temporoparietal region is the site for comprehending prosody.
The sentence “Bill is here.” has stress on the first word, whereas the sentence “Bill is here?” has stress on the last word. A
schoolteacher, for example, with a developing prosody deficit began to have difficulty controlling students in her class. She had
feelings of anger when the students misbehaved and desire to assert her authority in order to reestablish control, but she could not
convey these feelings because she could not place appropriate stress on her speech.
Some patients with prosody deficits cannot comprehend emotional tone or prosody of others that are speaking. These patients
don’t understand jokes and have difficulty relating to people in social gatherings.
Alexia and Agraphia
Alexia is the inability to read and agraphia is the inability to write. These inabilities may be present individually or together and
combined with aphasia. Vision is bilateral in the occipital lobes. Alexia results from disruption of visual input from both hemispheres
to the language areas of the left hemisphere. PET functional imaging studies show that reading activates an area in the left
hemisphere that is just anterior to the visual cortex. This may be the critical area that when damaged results in alexia.
Dyslexia
Dyslexia is a reading disorder. It is often referred to as developmental dyslexia. Estimates of the population that it effects range
from 10 to 30%. Its cause is not known for sure, and there may be multiple causes.
Figure 8.11
Asymmetry of the two lateral sulci showing
the posterior extension of the left lateral
sulcus indicating that the planum temporale
is larger on the left. Select any label to
highlight the area. (Adapted from Rubens
A.B., Mahowald, M.W., Hutton, J.T.
Asymmetry of the lateral (sylvian)
fissures in man. Neurol. 26:620-624,
1976.)
One possibility is that, like alexia, there may be abnormalities in connections between visual and language areas.
Another possibility is that there might be a deficit in hemispheric specialization. In dyslexic males, unlike normal males, the left
planum temporale is not larger that the right one. There is incomplete segregation of cell layers. There are clusters of neurons that
appear to be inappropriately connected. Maybe the migration of neurons to the left temporal cortex during development was slowed
or somehow disrupted.
Another possibility is that conduction velocity in the magnocellular pathway of the visual system is slowed. The cells in this pathway
are abnormally small. Dyslexic patients have trouble processing fast, high-contrast stimuli, like words.
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
Patients with difficulty selecting words representing what they intend to say (semantic paraphasia),
along with difficulty in repeating sentences is most often associated with:
A. Broca aphasia
B. Conduction aphasia
C. Deficits in prosody
D. Wernicke aphasia
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter08.html 10/11

1/7/25, 10:09 AM Higher Cortical Functions: Language (Section 4, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
E. Transcortical aphasia
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s4/chapter08.html 11/11



