1/7/25, 10:07 AM Ocular Motor Control (Section 3, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 3: Motor Systems
Search
Chapter 8: Ocular Motor Control
Valentin Dragoi, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
Last Review 20 Oct 2020
8.1 Introduction
Normal visual perception requires the proper functioning of ocular motor systems that control the position and movement of the
eyes to focus the image of the object-of-interest (i.e., the visual target) on corresponding areas of the retinas of the two eyes. For
example, in addition to producing adjustments in pupil size and lens refraction, accommodation involves the convergence of the
two eyes to direct onto the foveae the images of near objects. Eye movements are also controlled to direct the eyes towards a
visual target and to follow the movements of the visual target. Such eye movements are controlled by gaze systems. They
coordinate the movement of the two eyes to ensure that the images on the two retinas fall on corresponding areas of the
binocular field. When this fails, diplopia (double vision) results.
8.2 Extraocular Muscles and their Innervation
The extraocular muscles execute eye movements and are innervated by three cranial nerves. The muscles are attached to the
sclera of the eye at one end and are anchored to the bony orbit of the eye at their opposite ends. Contraction of the muscles
produce movement of the eyes within the orbit. The cranial lower motor neurons innervate these muscles and thereby control
their contractions.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter08.html 1/14

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Ocular Motor Control (Section 3, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
Figure 8.1
The extraocular muscles of the right eye and their actions. Antagonistic
actions pull the eye in opposite directions whereas synergistic actions pull
the eye in the same direction.
A. The Extraocular Muscles
For each eye, six muscles work together to control eye position and movement. Two extraocular muscles, the medial rectus and
lateral rectus, work together to control horizontal eye movements (Figure 8.1, left).
Contraction of the medial rectus pulls the eye towards the nose (adduction or medial movement).
Contraction of the lateral rectus pulls the eye away from the nose (abduction or lateral movement).
The actions of these two muscles are antagonistic: one muscle must relax while the other contracts to execute horizontal eye
movements. Four other extraocular muscles working together control vertical eye movements and eye rotation around the mid-
orbital axis (Figure 8.1, right). Contraction of the
superior rectus produces
eye elevation
minor movements: medial rotation and adduction
superior oblique produces
eye depression
other movements: medial rotation and abduction
inferior rectus produces
eye depression
minor movements: lateral rotation and adduction
inferior oblique produces
eye elevation
other movements: lateral rotation and abduction
To direct the eye upward or downward, two muscles contract synergistically as the two antagonist muscles relax. For example, to
elevate the eye while looking straight ahead, the superior rectus and inferior oblique contract together as the inferior rectus and
superior oblique relax. The superior rectus and inferior oblique muscles working together pull the eye upward without rotating the
eye. To depress the eye while looking straight ahead, the inferior rectus and superior oblique contract together as the superior
rectus and inferior oblique relax. The inferior rectus and superior oblique working together pull the eye downward without rotating
the eye.
B. Extraocular Muscle Efferents
Three cranial motor nuclei provide efferent control of the extraocular muscles. Activation of the motor neurons produces
contraction of the innervated muscle.
The abducens nucleus
sends its axons in the abducens (VI cranial) nerve
controls the lateral rectus of the ipsilateral eye.
The trochlear nucleus
sends its axons in the trochlear (IV cranial) nerve
controls the superior oblique of the contralateral eye.
The oculomotor complex contains nuclei that
send axons in the oculomotor (III cranial) nerve
control
the superior levator in the eyelid of both eyes
extraocular muscles, which include the
medial rectus of the ipsilateral eye,
inferior oblique of the ipsilateral eye
inferior rectus of the ipsilateral eye
superior rectus of the contralateral eye1.
C. Upper Motor Neuron Control
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter08.html 2/14

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Ocular Motor Control (Section 3, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
Figure 8.2
The axons of the abducens interneurons decussate and travel
in the medial longitudinal fasciculus to the contralateral
oculomotor nucleus to excite the motor neurons controlling the
medial rectus of the eye contralateral to the abducens nucleus.
The motor neurons controlling synergist and antagonist muscles must coordinate their activities to produce the desired eye
movements. Within the abducens nucleus are abducens interneurons, which send their axons into the contralateral medial
longitudinal fasciculus (MLF). They ascend in the MLF to end on oculomotor neurons controlling the medial rectus (Figure 8.2).
The abducens interneurons coordinate the activity of the ipsilateral lateral rectus with that of the contralateral medial rectus. For
example, excitation of the motor neurons in the left abducens nucleus will result in contraction of the left lateral rectus and
abduction of the left eye (i.e., movement of the left eye towards the left). Excitation of the interneurons in the left abducens
nucleus will excite neurons in the right oculomotor nucleus that innervate the right medial rectus. Contraction of the right medial
results in adduction of the right eye (i.e., movement of the right eye towards the left). Consequently, both the right and left eyes
will be directed towards the left when the left abducens nucleus is excited.
Interconnections between the trochlear nucleus and oculomotor nuclear complex coordinate their activity to allow the upward and
downward movement of the eyes. These interconnecting axons appear to travel along with the fibers of the tectospinal tract (that
is, they do not travel in the medial longitudinal fasciculus).
8.3 Gaze Stabilization: Eye Movements that Counter-Act Head Movement
There are two functional classes of eye movements (Table I): those that stabilize the eye when the head moves or appears to move
(gaze stabilization) and those that keep the image of a visual target focused on the fovea (a.k.a., foveation) when the visual target
changes or moves (gaze shifting). Two gaze stabilization systems operate during head movement: the vestibulo-ocular and the
optokinetic systems. Vestibulo-ocular and optokinetic movements are conjugate movements in which both eyes move in the
same direction.
Table I
Classification of Eye Movements
Eye Movement Type Function
Gaze Stabilization
Vestibulo-ocular Initiated by vestibular mechanisms during brief/rapid head
movement
Optokinetic (vestigial in
Initiate by visual mechanisms during slow head movement
humans)
Gaze Shifting
Vergence
Adjusts for different viewing distance
Smooth Pursuit Follows moving visual target
Saccade Directs eyes toward visual target
A. The Vestibulo-ocular Reflexes
Vestibulo-ocular reflexes produce eye movements that compensate for head movements detected by the vestibular system. You
have learned in earlier chapters how the vestibular system detects head movements and initiates the vestibulo-ocular responses.
B. Optokinetic Nystagmus
Optokinetic nystagmus is elicited
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter08.html 3/14

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Ocular Motor Control (Section 3, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
by slow head movements undetected by the vestibular system,
by moving objects that produce the illusion of head movement (e.g., alternating bands of light and dark lines rotated around
the viewer's head)
as corrections for small spontaneous eye movements
Notice that optokinetic nystagmus is a visual-ocular response - driven by visual stimuli moving across the visual field. Vestibular
nystagmus is a vestibulo-ocular response - driven by a vestibular stimulus (i.e., accelerating head movement). In humans, the
smooth pursuit system predominates in producing eye movements that track moving visual targets. As the optokinetic system is
vestigial in humans, it will not be covered in this lecture.
8.4 Gaze Shifting: Eye Movements to Focus the Image on the Fovea
Three gaze shifting systems function during foveation: smooth pursuit, which directs the eyes to follow a moving visual target;
saccade, which directs the eyes toward a visual target; and vergence, which alters the angle between the two eyes to adjust for
changes in distance from the visual target. We have covered the neural control of convergence during accommodation in the
previous lecture.
A. Voluntary Saccades
Voluntary or guided saccades are eye movements initiated to bring an object-of-interest into view or initiated under direction (e.g.,
to the command “eyes left”). Saccades consist of short, rapid, jerky (ballistic) movements of predetermined trajectory that direct
the eyes toward some visual target.
The Voluntary Saccades Circuit
The neurons in the frontal eye field (Figure 8.3)
are involved in initiating voluntary saccades that locate and focus on a particular object-of-interest.
are located posteriorly in the middle frontal gyrus.
compute the direction and amplitude of the saccade.
send their axons in the internal capsule, crus cerebri and corticotectal tract to the midbrain where they decussate and end in
the superior colliculus.
The superior colliculus neurons
also receive afferent input from the
retina, via the brachium of the superior colliculus
inferior colliculus (auditory)
parietal (visual association) area
based on afferent information, correct and send control signals for the amplitude and direction of the saccades to the vertical
and horizontal gaze centers
send their axons to the gaze centers within the tectospinal tract (i.e., not in the medial longitudinal fasciculus)
The vertical gaze center
is located in the midbrain reticular formation2
has direct control over the lower motor neurons in the oculomotor and trochlear nuclei
Figure 8.3
The voluntary saccades circuit. The frontal eye
field generates the command signals that initiate
eye movement in a contralateral direction (i.e., to
the right in this figure). The signal is sent to the
superior colliculus and caudate nucleus. The
superior colliculus, in turn, sends control signals
to the gaze centers in the midbrain and pons
reticular formation. The posterior parietal cortex,
part of the dorsal visual stream, determines
whether the visual target has been achieved and
sends corrective signals to the frontal eye field
and superior colliculus when the visual target has
not come into view. The basal ganglion
structures, the caudate and substantia nigra, help
regulate the action of the superior colliculus.
The horizontal gaze center
is called the paramedian pontine reticular formation (PPRF)
has direct control over the abducens lower motor neurons and interneurons
Recall that the abducens nucleus contains
lower motor neurons that send their axons in the ipsilateral abducens nerve to the lateral rectus muscle
interneurons that send their axons in the contralateral medial longitudinal fasciculus to the oculomotor neurons
controlling the medial rectus
Nuclei of the basal ganglion
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter08.html 4/14

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Ocular Motor Control (Section 3, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
modulate the activity of the superior colliculus3
the caudate, receives excitatory input from the frontal eye field and sends inhibitory input to the substantia nigra4
the substantia nigra, provides an inhibitory input to the superior colliculus but is inhibited by the caudate nucleus.5
The superior colliculus can initiate and control saccades independent of input from the frontal eye field. However, the motor
control signals initiated by the frontal eye field and the superior colliculus differ in function.
Normally the frontal eye field initiates voluntary and memory-guided saccades,
whereas the superior colliculus initiates reflex orienting saccades.
However, when the frontal eye field is damaged, the superior colliculus will compensate for the loss following a short period of
dysfunction. For example, damage to the right frontal eye field produces a transient inability to look voluntarily to the left side.
Afferent Control of Voluntary Saccades
Because voluntary saccades are not, in general, initiated by visual stimuli, afferent visual control occurs only after the fact. That
is, the visual system (i.e., the posterior parietal visual association cortex6 in Figure 8.3) is used to determine whether the saccade
was successful in bringing the desired object into view. Consequently, the saccades consists of a series of short, fast eye
movement, followed by a check by the visual system as to whether the desired visual target is in view, which may be followed by
another series of brief eye movements to locate the visual target. The repeated sequence of brief, rapid eye movements and image
check until the visual target is in view characterizes saccades.
B. Smooth Pursuit
Smooth pursuit (tracking) is an eye movement elicited by a moving visual target that the eyes follow voluntarily or under direction
(e.g., the request to "watch the moving pen"). Pursuit movements are described to be voluntary, smooth, continuous, conjugate
eye movements with velocity and trajectory determined by the moving visual target. By tracking the movement of the visual target,
the eyes maintain a focused image of the target on the fovea. Notice that a visual stimulus (the moving visual target) is required to
initiate this eye movement.
The Smooth Pursuit Circuit
Temporal eye field neurons in the non-human primate (parts of Brodmann's areas 39 or MST- medial superior temporal gyrus &
37 or MT- middle temporal gyrus.
are believed to be involved in the initiation and guidance of smooth pursuit eye movements7(Figure 8.4)
compute the direction and velocity of the moving visual target.8
correspond to neurons in superior temporal-inferior parietal areas in humans. That is, damage to the temporal-parietal areas
in humans produce symptoms similar to those produced by damage to MT and MST in non-human primates.
send their axons to the dorsolateral pontine nucleus (DLPN).
Frontal eye field neurons, however,
appear to initiate the smooth pursuit - at the request of the temporal eye field neurons
also send their axons to the dorsolateral pontine nucleus
Dorsolateral pontine nucleus
computes the direction and speed of eye movement (pursuit) necessary to match the direction and velocity of the moving
visual target
axons decussate and end in the contralateral cerebellum9
The cerebellum
sends its axons to the vestibular nuclei
The vestibular nuclei
send axons to the abducens, trochlear and oculomotor nuclei via the medial longitudinal fasciculus
control smooth pursuit eye movements - for the temporal eye field
Consequently, the vestibular nuclei help coordinate the activities of antagonist muscles involved in eye movements during smooth
pursuit and vestibule-ocular reflexes.10
Note that there are two decussations (double crossings) involved in the horizontal smooth pursuit pathway (i.e., the DLPN axons
and the axons of the vestibular nuclei providing excitatory input to the abducens nucleus). Consequently, the command signals
generated by the MST and MT cortical neurons result in an execution of smooth pursuit eye movement in a direction ipsilateral to
these cortical neurons. Normally, a command generated by the left MST and MT cortical neurons results in both eyes tracking the
movement of an object moving to the left.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter08.html 5/14

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Ocular Motor Control (Section 3, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
Figure 8.4
The smooth pursuit pathway. The
temporal eye field sends signals to the
dorsolateral pontine nuclei indicating the
direction and velocity of movement of the
visual target. The dorsolateral pontine
nuclei determines the direction and
velocity of eye movement necessary to
tract the visual target and sends that
information on to cranial nerve nuclei by
way of the cerebellum and vestibular
nuclei. That is, this pathway engages the
vestibulo-ocular circuit to control smooth
pursuit eye movements. The frontal eye
field appears to initiate, but not direct,
the eye movement "at the request" of the
temporal eye field.
8.5 Clinical Signs of Damage to Ocular Motor Systems
Damage to the lower motor neurons that innervate an extraocular muscle results in a flaccid paralysis of the muscle, whereas
damage to upper motor neurons produce deficits only in selective types of movements (e.g., smooth pursuit).
A. Lower Motor Neurons
Damage to an extraocular muscle’s motor neurons results in a paralysis of the muscle that is often manifested as a strabismus (a
misalignment of the two eyes). At rest (while attempting to look straight ahead), the denervated eye is deviated from its normal
position by the unopposed action of the muscle that is its antagonist. The strabismus may result in double vision (diplopia) because
the image falling on the retina of each eye will be from non-corresponding areas in the binocular visual fields. When the patient
closes one eye, the double image is replaced by a single image.
Damage to the oculomotor nerve. As we have already covered this topic in the previous lecture, a brief summary of the effect of
oculomotor nerve lesion on eye movements will be presented.
All of the extraocular muscles, except the lateral rectus and superior oblique, will be denervated and paralyzed and the patient
will be unable to elevate or adduct the eye ipsilateral to the oculomotor nerve damaged.
The innervation of the superior palpebrae muscle and the ciliary ganglion (postganglionic parasympathetic innervation of the
iris sphincter and ciliary muscles) will also be lost. Consequently, there will be ptosis, dilated pupil and lateral strabismus in
the denervated eye.
Figure 8.5
Observe the patient's response to the
commands of the control buttons.
Symbols: The arrow indicates the direction
Right Left of the eye movement. The plus symbol
represents the position of the eye that has
PLAY PLAY PPLLAAYY not deviated from mid position.
LOOK RIGHT LOOK STRAIGHT LOOK LEFT
c 2000 UTHSCH
If the left oculomotor nerve is damaged,
at rest, the eye is deviated down and laterally (is depressed and abducted) - a lateral strabismus - because the lateral
rectus is unopposed.
on an attempted gaze to the right, the left medial rectus will not contract to adduct the left eye (i.e., it will not move the eye
toward the nose, medially).
Consequently, at rest and during an attempted right lateral gaze, the lateral strabismus will result in a diplopia. On attempting to
adduct the eye (i.e., look right or during convergence), the left lateral rectus relaxes and the left eye deviates to the midline, but
not past it.
Damage to the trochlear nerve. When the trochlear nerve is damaged, the symptoms are mild. The downward and lateral
movement of the eye may be weakened and may cause diplopia when reading or descending stairs. A patient may present with his
head tilted because the damaged eye is extorted (i.e., rotated with top of the eye tilted away from the nose) and slightly elevated
because of the paralysis of the superior oblique muscle. Tilting the head away from the affected eye brings the visual axis of the
partially paralyzed eye into alignment with the visual axis of the normal eye.
8.6 Clinical Example #1
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter08.html 6/14

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Ocular Motor Control (Section 3, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
Symptoms. A 65 year-old male presents with a medial strabismus of his left eye (Figure 8.6, Rest) and cannot move his left eye to
the left (Figure 6, Left). His right eye has normal motility and his pupillary reflexes are normal. His vision is normal in both eyes. He
has normal sensation on his face and body and no other motor symptoms.
Figure 8.6
Observe the patient's response to the
commands of the control buttons.
Symbols: The arrow indicates the
Right Left direction of the eye movement. The plus
symbol represents the eye that has not
PLAY PLAY PPLLAAYY deviated from mid position.
LOOK RIGHT LOOK STRAIGHT LOOK LEFT
c 2000 UTHSCH
You observe that the patient
has a left medial strabismus
has limited mobility in his left eye (i.e., it moves to the midpoint when he attempts to look to the left)
cannot fully abduct his left eye
can move his right eye in all directions.
You conclude that his functional loss
is not sensory
involves only one eye
may involve an extraocular muscle or its lower motor neurons
Side & Level of Damage: As his symptoms
does not involve brain stem functions
is restricted to a left medial strabismus
you conclude that the damage involves the
lateral rectus OR
abducens nerve
left side (i.e., the symptoms are ipsilesional)
Electrophysiological tests indicate that the left lateral rectus is responsive (i.e., normal). You conclude that the left abducens nerve
has been damaged.
Damage to the abducens nerve. The lateral rectus will be denervated and paralyzed and the patient will be unable to abduct the
eye. For example, if the left abducens nerve is damaged, the left eye will not abduct fully (move away from the nose, towards the
left, laterally). While attempting to look straight ahead, the left eye will be deviated medially towards the nose (medial or nasal
strabismus) due to the unopposed action of the medial rectus of the left eye. On attempting to gaze left, the left eye may deviate
to the midpoint, but not past it, because the medial rectus of the left eye is relaxed. The patient may complain of double or blurred
vision (diplopia) when looking towards the ipsilesional side (i.e., left) or when looking straight ahead.
B. Upper Motor Neurons
Damage of upper motor neurons does not result in a flaccid paralysis. However, the muscle will not be activated into the response
normally controlled by the upper motor neuron (e.g., voluntary saccades controlled by the frontal eye field). However, the muscle
will perform reflex responses (e.g., convergence during accommodation or nystagmus during head rotation) and responses
controlled by other intact ocular motor circuits.
8.7 Clinical Example #2
Symptoms. A 65 year-old male presents with a left medial strabismus and cannot move both his eyes to the left (Figure 8.7). His
vision and his pupillary reflexes are normal in both eyes. He has normal sensation on his face and body and no other motor
symptoms.
Figure 8.7
Observe the patient's response to the
commands of the control buttons.
Symbols: The arrow indicates the
Right Left direction of the eye movement. The plus
symbol represents the position of the eye
PLAY PLAY PPLLAAYY that has not deviated from mid position.
LOOK RIGHT LOOK STRAIGHT LOOK LEFT
c 2000 UTHSCH
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter08.html 7/14

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Ocular Motor Control (Section 3, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
You observe that the patient
has a left medial strabismus
has limited mobility in his left eye (i.e., it moves to the midpoint when he attempts to look to the left)
cannot fully abduct his left eye
cannot move both eyes toward his left.
You conclude that his functional losses
are not sensory
involve both eyes
may involve upper and lower motor neurons
Side & Level of Damage: As his symptoms involves
a medial strabismus of the left eye
an inability to perform a lateral conjugate gaze to the left
brain stem functions
you conclude that the damage involves the
abducens motor neurons
abducens interneurons (failure of conjugate lateral gaze)
left side (i.e., the symptoms are ipsilesional for the left eye paralysis)
Neural imaging tests indicate a small infarct (i.e., a lacunar stroke) in the region of the left facial colliculus. You conclude that the
damaged area includes the left abducens nucleus.
Damage to the abducens nucleus. The result is an abnormality of conjugate horizontal eye movements called lateral gaze
paralysis. With the eyes at rest, there is a medial strabismus in the eye ipsilateral to the damage (indicating abducens motor
neuron damage). During an attempted lateral gaze, both eyes cannot be moved beyond the midline in an ipsilesional direction (i.e.,
toward the damage side). As the left abducens interneurons send axons to the right oculomotor neurons innervating the medial
rectus of the right eye (Figure 8.2), the failure to perform a lateral gaze to the left suggests an abducens nucleus lesion. An
attempted lateral gaze in a contralesional direction (away from the damaged side) is successful. Note that as the lower motor
neurons (i.e., the abducens motor neurons), as well as a motor control center (i.e., the abducens interneurons), are damaged, both
reflex and voluntary eye movements in the horizontal plane are affected.
An example of the effect of damage to the medial longitudinal fasciculus is presented in the Appendix.
8.8 Clinical Example #3
Symptoms. A 65 year-old male was brought to the emergency room because he suddenly lost the ability to speak and could not
move the right side of his body or face. He was described to be right handed and on antihypertensive medications. Examination
revealed weakness in his right face, no movement in his right arm and weakness in his right leg with Babinski's sign. His speech
was nonfluent. He could not move his eyes to the right when asked to "look right" (Figure 8.8). He was able to move his eyes in
other directions. Sensation over the body and face was decreased on the right side. His vision and hearing appeared within the
normal range.
Figure 8.8
Observe the patient's response to the
commands of the control buttons. Notice at the
"look straight" command, this patient exhibits a
"left gaze preference" when the eyes are at
Right Left rest. Symbols: The arrow indicates the direction
of the eye movement. The plus symbol
PLAY PLAY PPLLAAYY represents the position of the eye that has not
LOOK RIGHT LOOK STRAIGHT LOOK LEFT deviated from mid position.
c 2000 UTHSCH
You observe that the patient's eyes
are directed to the left at rest (i.e., exhibits a left gaze preference)
have full mobility when looking up and down and to his left
cannot move together toward the right (i.e., both eyes stop at mid position).
You conclude that his functional loss
is not sensory
involves a right hemiplegia (i.e., he can't move his right body or face)
involves Broca's aphasia (i.e., his speech is non-fluent)
involves failure of both eyes to perform a lateral gaze to the right
Side & Level of Damage: As his symptoms
does not involve lower motor neurons or muscles
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter08.html 8/14

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Ocular Motor Control (Section 3, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
involve upper motor neurons (i.e., conjugate lateral eye movements)
involve cortical functions (i.e., hemiplegia and aphasia)
you conclude that the damage involves the
caudal frontal cortex including the frontal eye field
left side (i.e., the loss of right lateral gaze and the right hemiplegia and aphasia)
Neural imaging tests indicate infarction of branches of the medial cerebral artery supplying the lateral surface of the left frontal
cortex.
Damage to the voluntary saccades circuit. Damage to the frontal cortical eye field and the midbrain (superior colliculus) effect
voluntary and reflex saccades, particularly those in the horizontal plane. Immediately following unilateral damage of the frontal
cortical eye field, there is an inability to voluntarily initiate a horizontal eye movement in a direction contralateral to (away from)
the side of the lesion. That is, immediately following a right frontal lobe lesion, both eyes cannot be moved voluntarily to the left
beyond the midline. However, both eyes will move to the left beyond the midline to vestibular stimulation. Both eyes can also be
directed to the side ipsilateral to the lesion and may tend to deviate toward the lesion when the eyes are at rest. The deficits
disappear with time if the damage is localized to the frontal cortical eye field and does not involve the superior colliculus.
8.9 Clinical Example #4
Symptoms. A 55 year-old male was brought to the emergency room. He was overweight and reportedly normally right-handed, a
heavy smoker and drinker. He had lost consciousness during a game of basketball and when he awoke, appeared confused. When
examined in the ER, he was conscious but followed no commands and could not repeat. He could mimic gestures and was able to
voluntarily look to the left and right (Figure 8.9). His eyes followed a pen moving to his right with a smooth pursuit movement.
However, his eye movements became jerky and ballistic at midpoint in the attempt to follow the pen as it moved to his left.
Figure 8.9
Observe the patient's response to the
commands of the control buttons. Notice at
the "look straight" command, the patient's
eyes tend to wander when at rest. Also
notice at the "look left" command, the
Right Left patient's eyes tend to move in a jerky, step-
like manner. Symbols: The arrow indicates
PLAY PLAY PPLLAAYY the direction of the eye movement. The plus
LOOK RIGHT LOOK STRAIGHT LOOK LEFT symbol represents the position of the eye
that has not deviated from mid position.
c 2000 UTHSCH
You observe that the patient's eyes
tended to move about when at rest position
have full mobility when performing saccades
cannot smoothly track a visual target moving toward his left
You conclude that his functional loss
is not sensory
involves Wernieck's aphasia (i.e., impaired comprehension and inability to repeat)
involves failure of smooth pursuit to the left
Side & Level of Damage: As his symptoms
does not involve lower motor neurons or muscles
involve upper motor neurons (i.e., conjugate lateral eye movements)
involve cortical functions (i.e., aphasia)
you conclude that the damage involves the
temporal-parietal cortex including Wernieck’s area
left side (i.e., aphasia and no smooth pursuit to the left)
Neural imaging tests indicate infarction of branches of the left medial cerebral artery supplying the caudal superior temporal gyrus
and inferior parietal gyrus.
Damage to the smooth pursuit circuit: Damage to the temporal eye field causes deficits in the ability to fixate on objects and to
track them. Attempts to fixate on a target will be undermined by severe instability and wandering of the eyes. Tracking movements
are jerky rather than smooth when attempting to follow an object moving in a direction toward (ipsilateral to) the side of the lesion.
Note that the smooth pursuit circuit includes a double crossing and the temporal eye field controls ipsilateral eye movements (i.e.,
right cortex controls smooth pursuit to the right). When the temporal eye field is damaged, the two eyes may follow a visual target
in an ipsilesional direction; but does so using the voluntary saccades circuit. That is, if the frontal cortical eye fields are intact, the
eyes may be moved voluntarily (guided saccade) toward an object of interest ipsilateral to the impairment. However, in this case,
the movements will be jerky unlike the eye movements in smooth pursuit. Tracking of visual targets contralateral to the lesion will
be smooth.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter08.html 9/14

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Ocular Motor Control (Section 3, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
8.10 Summary
This chapter reviews the ways in which voluntary eye movements are initiated by cerebral cortical activity and involve more ocular
motor control structures than the simple ocular reflexes. The cortical areas initiate eye movements and work through brainstem
ocular motor centers to produce a response, i.e., there are no direct connections between the cerebral cortex and the extraocular
motor nuclei. The smooth pursuit system utilizes a pontine nucleus, the cerebellum, and the vestibulo-ocular reflex pathway to
execute eye movements to tract visual targets. The voluntary saccades system is similar to other voluntary motor systems in
engaging areas in the frontal cortex to initiate the response and in influencing the motor neurons indirectly through lower motor
control structures (i.e., the vertical and horizontal gaze centers). The gaze centers function to coordinate and control the activity of
motor neurons to insure that the extraocular muscles act synergistically to produce conjugate saccades.
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
The pontine paramedian reticular formation is involved in which of the following?
A. Vestibular nystagmus
B. Optokinetic nystagmus
C. Saccades
D. Smooth pursuit
E. Accommodation
Question 2 A B C D E
A 57-year old male with a past history of high blood pressure awakens with a terrible headache. His
eyes tend to drift about and when he is asked to track a pen moving to his left, both eyes move in
short, jerky steps. In contrast, both eyes move smoothly when his eyes track a pen moving to his
right. Given the patient's history, a radiological study is scheduled to determine whether a stroke had
occurred. The study determines the area of infarction to include which of the following?
A. Left abducens nerve
B. Left medial longitudinal fasciculus
C. Right frontal lobe
D. Right temporal lobe
E. Left temporal lobe
APPENDIX TO OCULAR MOTOR SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
This section is included for those who wish to use further "clinical cases" to test their knowledge of ocular motor
functions.
Example A1
Symptoms. A patient visits his primary care physician at the urging of his wife. She noticed that his left eye lid was drooping
slightly and that his face appeared flushed. She was concerned he might have suffered a stroke. On examination, it was noted that
his left pupil was much smaller than his right (Figure 8.A.1), but responded directly and consensually to light. Physical examination
determines that touch, vibration, position and pain sensations are normal over the entire the body and face. There are no other
motor symptoms.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter08.html 10/14

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Ocular Motor Control (Section 3, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
Figure 8.A1
Observe the patient's eyes under low
illumination. Also observe the reaction of
the patient's eyes to light directed in the left
Right Left
or right eye.
PLAY RESET PPLLAAYY
LLiigghhtt rriigghhtt eeyyee Light left eye
c 2000 UTHSCH
You observe that the patient exhibits
no loss of cutaneous sensation in the face area
no loss of ocular motility
miosis (pupil constriction)
pseudoptosis (mild eye lid droop)
flushing of the left side of the face
You conclude that his left eye's functional loss is
not sensory
an autonomic motor dysfunction
Pathway(s) affected: You conclude that structures in the following motor pathway have been affected is
the sympathetic innervation of the face
Side & Level of Damage: As these symptoms
involve only motor function
involve sympathetic innervation
do not involve other diencephalic or brain stem functions
involve only one eye
involve loss of pupil dilation
you conclude that the damage
involves axons of the superior cervical ganglion
is in a branch of the sympathetic nerve innervating the face
is on the left side (i.e., the symptoms are ipsilesional)
Sympathetic Innervation of the Eye. Horner's syndrome is a constellation of symptoms that includes miosis, pseudoptosis and
enopthalmosis (sunken eyeball). It is characteristic of damage to the sympathetic innervation of the face provided by the superior
cervical ganglion. This syndrome also occurs when the hypothalamic output to the sympathetic preganglionic neurons in the lateral
horn at T1 to T3 is interrupted or when the T1 to T3 anterior roots are damaged.
Example A2
Symptoms. A 35 year-old female complains that she has double vision when she attempts to look to the right. When looking
straight ahead, both her eyes assume normal positions (Figure 8.A.2). She is able to look up and down and to the left with both
eyes. However, she cannot adduct her left eye (i.e., move it to the right). Both her eyes converge when a visual target is brought
close to her eyes. Her vision and pupillary reflexes are normal in both eyes. She has normal sensation on her face and body and no
other motor symptoms.
Figure 8.A2
Observe the patient's response to the
commands of the control buttons. Symbols:
The arrow indicates the direction of the eye
Right Left movement. The plus symbol represents the
position of the eye that has not deviated
PLAY PLAY PPLLAAYY from mid position.
LOOK RIGHT LOOK STRAIGHT LOOK LEFT
c 2000 UTHSCH
You observe that the patient's eyes
assume the normal position when looking straight ahead
have full mobility when looking up and down and to her left
cannot move together toward the right (i.e., the left eye moves to mid position).
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter08.html 11/14

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Ocular Motor Control (Section 3, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
do converge during accommodation
You conclude that her functional loss
is not sensory
does not present with a strabismus when the eyes are at rest position
involves the left eye only when attempting a lateral gaze to the right
is not lateral gaze paralysis because the left eye can be abducted when looking left
is not paralysis of the left medial rectus because the left eye can be adducted during convergence and does not exhibit lateral
strabismus at rest.
Side & Level of Damage: As her symptoms
do not involve lower motor neurons or muscles (i.e., the left eye can adduct during convergence)
involve upper motor neurons (i.e., conjugate lateral eye movements)
you conclude that the damage involves the
medial longitudinal fasciculus (i.e., the abducens nucleus is not involved)
left side (i.e., the symptoms are ipsilesional for the left eye)
Neural imaging tests indicate demyelination of the medial longitudinal fasciculus on the left side.
Damage to the medial longitudinal fasciculus. The medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF) is a fiber tract that contains, in part, axons of
the vestibular nuclei and of the contralateral abducens interneurons. Lesions in the MLF results in an abnormality of conjugate
horizontal eye movements called an internuclear ophthalmoplegia. The medial rectus ipsilateral to the damaged MLF does not
function during a lateral gaze in a contralesional direction. With the eyes at rest, both eyes are directed forward in the “normal”
position. If the damage is unilateral, both eyes can be moved in an ipsilesional direction during an attempted lateral gaze (i.e.,
towards the left if the left medial longitudinal fasciculus is damaged). In contrast, the ipsilesional eye (i.e., the left eye ipsilateral to
the severed left tract) cannot be moved beyond the midline during an attempted contralesional (right) lateral gaze.
Figure 8.A3
The left medial
longitudinal fasciculus has
been damaged and cannot
carry excitatory signals
from the right abducens
interneurons to the left
oculomotor neurons
controlling the left medial
rectus.
Recall the left MLF carries the axons of the right abducens interneurons to the left oculomotor neurons, which control the medial
rectus of the left eye (Figure 8.A.3). Also recall that contraction of the medial rectus of the left eye directs the left eye nasally (i.e.,
contralaterally to the right).
Both eyes are adducted on convergence as the axons from the supraoculomotor area to the oculomotor neurons controlling the
medial rectus muscles of the two eyes are not affected by MLF lesions.
Table II
Classification of Eye Movement & Their Neural Control Structures
Eye
Function Afferent Input* & Motor Control Structures
Movement
Vestibular Receptors & Vestibular 1° Afferent Neurons*
Horizontal Movements: Medial Vestibular Nucleus*
Initiated by
vestibular VIm Lateral Rectus of One Eye
Vestibulo-
mechanisms
ocular
during head VIi (mlf) III Medial Rectus of Opposite Eye
movement
Vertical Movements: Superior Vestibular Nucleus*
IV & III Sup. or Inf. Oblique, Sup. or Inf. Rectus
Vergence Adjusts for
different Visual System* including Visual Association Cortex
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter08.html 12/14

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Ocular Motor Control (Section 3, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
viewing Supraoculomotor Nuclei
distances
III Medial Rectus Muscles
Visual System* including Visual Association Cortex
“Temporal” Eye Field
Dorsolateral Pontine Nucleus
Cerebellum
Follows
Smooth (watches) a
Lateral Pursuit: Medial Vestibular nucleus
Pursuit moving
visual target
VIm Lateral Rectus of One Eye
VIi (mlf) III Medial Rectus of Opposite Eye
Vertical Pursuit: Superior Vestibular Nucleus
VI & III Sup. or Inf. Oblique, Sup. or Inf. Rectus
Visual System* including Visual Association Cortex
Frontal Eye Field
Superior colliculus & Basal ganglia
Directs eyes Lateral Gaze: Pontine Paramedian Reticular Formation
Saccade toward
visual target VIm ® Lateral Rectus of One Eye
VIi (mlf) III Medial Rectus of Opposite Eye
Vertical Gaze: Midbrain Vertical Gaze Center
IV & III Sup. or Inf. Oblique, Sup. or Inf. Rectus
KEY: VII - Abducens Interneuron; VIm - Abducens Motor Neurons; III - oculomotor Motor Neurons; IV - Trochlear Motor
Neurons
[1] Note that each oculomotor nerve controls the extraocular muscles of its ipsilateral eye, i.e., the right nerve controls the superior and
inferior oblique and superior and inferior rectus of the right eye.
[2] For the curious, the vertical gaze center is located in the rostral interstitial nucleus of the medial longitudinal fasciculus and, according to
some, also in the interstitial nucleus of Cajal.
[3] This is all you need to know about the role of the basal ganglion for ocular motor tasks.
[4] No need to memorize this.
[5] See footnotes 3 and 4 above.
[6] Recall the posterior parietal cortex is part of the dorsal visual stream that determines the "where" of the visual scene (i.e., the location
and movement of the visual target).
[7]Please note this is in disagreement with Nolte, pg. 521, Figure 21-15, which identifies the extrastriate cortex as the course o the cortical
neurons controlling smooth pursuit.
[8]Recall from the lectures on the visual system that these cortical areas, MST and MT, are part of the visual sensory circuit involved with
detecting the "where" of a visual stimulus.
[9]For the curious, the DLPN axons end in the flocculus, paraflocculus & vermis of the cerebellum.
[10] the paramedian pontine reticular formation and abducens interneurons coordinate the activities of antagonistic muscles involved in
horizontal eye movements during saccades.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter08.html 13/14

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Ocular Motor Control (Section 3, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter08.html 14/14



1/7/25, 10:07 AM Ocular Motor System (Section 3, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 3: Motor Systems
Search
Chapter 7: Ocular Motor System
Valentin Dragoi, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
Last Review 20 Oct 2020
7.1 Introduction
The simplicity of the motor systems involved in controlling eye musculature make them ideal for illustrating the mechanisms and
principals you have been studying in the preceding material on motor systems. They involve the action of few muscles and of well
defined neural circuits.
We use our eyes to monitor our external environment and depend on our ocular motor systems to protect and guide our eyes. The
ocular motor systems control eye lid closure, the amount of light that enters the eye, the refractive properties of the eye, and eye
movements. The visual system provides afferent input to ocular motor circuits that use visual stimuli to initiate and guide the motor
responses. Neuromuscular systems control the muscles within the eye (intraocular muscles); the muscles attached to the eye
(extraocular muscles) and the muscles in the eyelid. Ocular motor responses include ocular reflexes and voluntary motor responses
to visual and other stimuli. The complexity of the circuitry (the chain or network of neurons) controlling a ocular motor response
increases with the level of processing involved in initiating, monitoring, and guiding the response.
In this chapter we will start at the level of reflex responses and move onto more complex voluntary responses in the following
lecture. The eye blink reflex is the simplest response and does not require the involvement of cortical structures. In contrast,
voluntary eye movements (i.e., visual tracking of a moving object) involve multiple areas of the cerebral cortex as well as basal
ganglion, brain stem and cerebellar structures.
7.2 Ocular Reflex Responses
The ocular reflexes are the simplest ocular motor responses. Ocular reflexes compensate for the condition of the cornea and for
changes in the visual stimulus. For example, the eye blink reflex protects the cornea from drying out and from contact with
foreign objects. The pupillary light reflex compensates for changes in illumination level, whereas the accommodation responses
compensate for changes in eye-to-object-viewed distance. Note that reflex responses are initiated by sensory stimuli that activate
afferent neurons (e.g., somatosensory stimuli for the eye blink reflex and visual stimuli for the pupillary light reflex and
accommodation responses).
In general, ocular reflexes are consensual (i.e., the response is bilateral involving both eyes). Consequently, a light directed in one
eye elicits responses, pupillary constriction, in both eyes. In this chapter you will learn of the structures normally involved in
performing these ocular responses and the disorders that result from damage to components of neural circuit controlling these
responses.
A. The Eye Blink Reflex
Tactile stimulation of the cornea results in an irritating sensation that normally evokes eyelid closure (an eye blink). The response is
consensual (i.e., bilateral) - involving automatic eyelid closure at both eyes.
The corneal eye blink reflex neural circuit: This neural circuit (Figure 7.1) is relatively simple, consisting of the
trigeminal1° afferent (free nerve endings in the cornea, trigeminal nerve, ganglion, root, and spinal trigeminal tract),
which end on
trigeminal 2° afferent in the spinal trigeminal nucleus, some of which send their axons to
reticular formation interneurons, which send their axons bilaterally to
facial motor neurons in the facial nucleus, which send their axons in the facial nerve to
orbicularis oculi, which functions to lower the eyelid
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter07.html 1/12

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Ocular Motor System (Section 3, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
Figure 7.1
The corneal eye blink reflex is initiated by the free nerve
endings in the cornea and involves the trigeminal nerve and
ganglion, the spinal trigeminal tract and nucleus, interneurons
in the reticular formation, motor neurons in the facial nucleus
and nerve, and the orbicularis oculi. As the afferent
information from each cornea is distributed bilaterally to facial
motor neurons by the reticular formation interneurons, the eye
blink response is consensual, that is, both eye lids will close to
stimulation of the cornea of either eye.
B. Pupillary Light Reflex
The pupillary light reflex involves adjustments in pupil size with changes in light levels.
The reflex is consensual: Normally light that is directed in one eye produces pupil constriction in both eyes.
The direct response is the change in pupil size in the eye to which the light is directed (e.g., if the light is shone in the right
eye, the right pupil constricts).
The consensual response is the change in pupil size in the eye opposite to the eye to which the light is directed (e.g., if the
light is shone in the right eye, the left pupil also constricts consensually).
The pupillary light reflex allows the eye to adjust the amount of light reaching the retina and protects the photoreceptors from
bright lights. The iris contains two sets of smooth muscles that control the size of the pupil (Figure 7.2).
The sphincter muscle fibers form a ring at the pupil margin so that when the sphincter contracts, it decreases (constricts)
pupil size.
The dilator muscle fibers radiate from the pupil aperture so that when the dilator contracts, it increases (dilates) pupil size.
Both muscles act to control the amount of light entering the eye and the depth of field of the eye1.
The iris sphincter is controlled by the parasympathetic system, whereas the iris dilator is controlled by the sympathetic
system.
The action of the dilator is antagonistic to that of the sphincter and the dilator must relax to allow the sphincter to decrease
pupil size.
Normally the sphincter action dominates during the pupillary light reflex.
Dilator muscle
Iris
of iris
Sphincter
muscle
of iris
Pupil
CONTRACT
DILATE
c 2000 UTHSCH
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter07.html 2/12

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Ocular Motor System (Section 3, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
Figure 7.2
Iris dilator and sphincter muscles and their actions.
The pupillary light reflex neural circuit: The pathway controlling pupillary light reflex (Figure 7.3) involves the
retina, optic nerve, optic chiasm, and the optic tract fibers that join the
brachium of the superior colliculus, which terminate in the
pretectal area of the midbrain, which sends most of its axons bilaterally in the posterior commissure to terminate in the
Edinger-Westphal nucleus of the oculomotor complex, which contains parasympathetic preganglionic neurons and sends
its axons in the oculomotor nerve to terminate in the
ciliary ganglion, which sends its parasympathetic postganglionic axons in the
short ciliary nerve, which ends on the
iris sphincter
RIGHT LEFT
Brachium of the
superior colliculus
Posterior
Pretectal commissure Pretectal
area area
Edinger-westphal Edinger-westphal
nucleus nucleus
Oculomotor
nerve Optic Optic tract
chiasm
Optic
nerve
Ciliary Ciliary
ganglion ganglion
Short ciliary
c 2000 UTHSCH nerve
Figure 7.3
The pupillary light reflex pathway. The lines ending with an
arrow indicate axons terminating in the structure at the tip of
the arrow. The lines beginning with a dot indicate axons
originating in the structure containing the dot. Bilateral damage
to pretectal area neurons (e.g., in neurosyphilis) will produce
Argyll-Robertson pupils (non-reactive to light, active during
accommodation).
Recall that the optic tract carries visual information from both eyes and the pretectal area projects bilaterally to both Edinger-
Westphal nuclei: Consequently, the normal pupillary response to light is consensual. That is, a light directed in one eye results in
constriction of the pupils of both eyes.
C. Pupillary Dark Response
The pupils normally dilate (increase in size) when it is dark (i.e., when light is removed). This response involves the relaxation of
the iris sphincter and contraction of the iris dilator. The iris dilator is controlled by the sympathetic nervous system.
The pupillary dark reflex neural circuit: The pathway controlling pupil dilation involves the
retina and the optic tract fibers terminating on neurons in the hypothalamus and the
axons of the hypothalamic neurons that descend to the spinal cord to end on the
sympathetic preganglionic neurons in the lateral horn of spinal cord segments T1 to T3, which send their axons out the spinal
cord to end on the
sympathetic neurons in the superior cervical ganglion, which send their
sympathetic postganglionic axons in the long ciliary nerve to the
iris dilator.
Axons from the superior cervical ganglion also innervate the face vasculature, sweat and lachrymal glands and the eyelid tarsal
muscles. When the superior cervical ganglion or its axons are damaged, a constellation of symptoms, known as Horner's
syndrome, result. This syndrome is characterized by miosis (pupil constriction), anhidrosis (loss of sweating), pseudoptosis (mild
eyelid droop), enopthalmosis (sunken eye) and flushing of the face.
D. The Accommodation Response
The accommodation response is elicited when the viewer directs his eyes from a distant (greater than 30 ft. away) object to a
nearby object (Nolte, Figure 17-40, Pg. 447). The stimulus is an “out-of-focus” image. The accommodation (near point) response is
consensual (i.e., it involves the actions of the muscles of both eyes). The accommodation response involves three actions:
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter07.html 3/12

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Ocular Motor System (Section 3, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
Pupil accommodation: The action of the iris sphincter was covered in the section on the pupillary light reflex. During
accommodation, pupil constriction utilizes the "pin-hole" effect and increases the depth of focus of the eye by blocking the light
scattered by the periphery of the cornea (Nolte, Figure 17-39, Pg. 447). The iris sphincter is innervated by the postganglionic
parasympathetic axons (short ciliary nerve fibers) of the ciliary ganglion (Figure 7.3).
Lens accommodation: Lens accommodation increases the curvature of the lens, which increases its refractive (focusing) power. The
ciliary muscles are responsible for the lens accommodation response. They control the tension on the zonules, which are attached
to the elastic lens capsule at one end and anchored to the ciliary body at the other end (Figure 7.4).
Canal of Cornea
Trabecular schlemm
meshwork
Limbus Anterior
chamber
Iris Anterior
lens
capsule
Sclera
Ciliary
muscle
Zonules
Posterior
Ciliary body chamber Posterior lens
c 2000UTHSCH capsule
Figure 7.4
The ciliary muscles, which control the position of the ciliary processes and the tension on the zonule, control the shape
of the lens. The ciliary muscles function as a sphincter and when contracted pull the ciliary body toward the lens to
decrease tension on the zonules (see Figure 7.5). The decreased tension allows the lens to increase its curvature and
refractive (focusing) power. When the ciliary muscle is relaxed, the ciliary body is not pulled toward the lens, and the
tension on the zonules is higher. High tension on the zonules pulls radially on the lens capsule and flattens the lens for
distance vision. The ciliary muscles are innervated by the postganglionic parasympathetic axons (short ciliary nerve
fibers) of the ciliary ganglion
c 2000 UTHSCH
PLAY
Ciliary muscles
relaxed
Figure 7.5
The accommodation response of the lens:
comparing the lens shape during near vision
(contraction of the ciliary muscle during
accommodation) with lens shape during
distance vision (relaxation of the ciliary
muscle).
Convergence in accommodation: When shifting one's view from a distant object to a nearby object, the eyes converge (are directed
nasally) to keep the object's image focused on the foveae of the two eyes. This action involves the contraction of the medial rectus
muscles of the two eyes and relaxation of the lateral rectus muscles. The medial rectus attaches to the medial aspect of the eye
and its contraction directs the eye nasally (adducts the eye). The medial rectus is innervated by motor neurons in the oculomotor
nucleus and nerve.
The accommodation neural circuit: The circuitry of the accommodation response is more complex than that of the pupillary light
reflex (Figure 7.6).
The afferent limb of the circuit includes the
retina (with the retinal ganglion axons in the optic nerve, chiasm and tract),
lateral geniculate body (with axons in the optic radiations), and
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter07.html 4/12

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Ocular Motor System (Section 3, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
visual cortex.
Ocular motor control neurons are interposed between the afferent and efferent limbs of this circuit and include the
visual association cortex, which
determines the image is "out-of-focus"
sends corrective signals via the internal capsule and crus cerebri to the
supraoculomotor nuclei, which
is located immediately superior to the oculomotor nuclei
generates motor control signals that initiate the accommodation response
sends these control signals bilaterally to the oculomotor complex.
The efferent limb of this system has two components: the
Edinger-Westphal nucleus, which
sends its axons in the oculomotor nerve to
control the ciliary ganglion, which
sends it axons in the short ciliary nerve to
control the iris sphincter and the ciliary muscle/zonules/lens of the eye
oculomotor neurons, which
sends its axons in the oculomotor nerve to
control the medial rectus
converge the two eyes.
RIGHT LEFT c 2000 UTHSCH
VISUAL ASSOCIATION VISUAL ASSOCIATION
CORTEX CORTEX
Excited
corticotectal
fibers
SUPRAOCULOMOTOR SUPRAOCULOMOTOR
AREA Excited AREA
preganglionic
parasympathetic
axon
EDINGER- EDINGER-
WESTPHAL WESTPHAL
NUCLEUS OCULOMOTOR Excited OCULOMOTOR NUCLEUS
NUCLEUS oculomotor NUCLEUS
axons to
medial rectus
EXCITED
ABDUCENS Unexcited Unexcited ABDUCENS
Short Ciliary
MOTOR abducens abducens MOTOR
Nerves
NEURONS nerve to nerve to NEURONS
lateral rectus lateral rectus
Figure 7.6
The accommodation pathway includes the afferent limb, which consists of the entire visual pathway; the higher
motor control structures, which includes an area in the visual association cortex and the supraoculomotor area; and
the efferent limb, which includes the oculomotor nuclei and ciliary ganglion. The lines ending with an arrow indicate
axons terminating in the structure at the tip of the arrow. The lines beginning with a dot indicate axons originating in
the structure containing the dot. During accommodation three motor responses occur: convergence (medial rectus
contracts to direct the eye nasally), pupil constriction (iris sphincter contracts to decrease the iris aperture) and lens
accommodation (ciliary muscles contract to decrease tension on the zonules).
7.3 Clinical Examples
An excellent way to test your knowledge of the material presented thus far is by examining the effects of damage to structures
within the ocular motor pathways. The observed motor loss(s) provide clues to the pathway(s) affected; and the muscle(s) and eye
affected provide clues to the level of the damage.
Cranial nerve damage: Damage to cranial nerves may result in sensory and motor symptoms. The sensory losses would involve
those sensations the cranial nerve normally conveys (e.g., taste from the anterior two thirds of the tongue and somatic sensations
from the skin of the ear - if facial nerve is damaged). The motor losses may be severe (i.e., a lower motor neuron loss that
produces total paralysis) if the cranial nerve contains all of the motor axons controlling the muscles of the normally innervated
area.
The cranial nerves involved in the eye blink response and pupillary response are the optic, oculomotor, trigeminal and facial nerves.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter07.html 5/12

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Ocular Motor System (Section 3, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
The optic nerve carries visual information from the eye.
The oculomotor nerve contains
lower motor axons innervating
extraocular muscles: the medial, superior and inferior rectus muscles, the inferior oblique muscle,
eyelid muscle: the superior levator palpebrae,
as well as parasympathetic preganglionic axons to the ciliary ganglion.
The trigeminal nerve contains
the 1° somatosensory afferents for the face, dura, oral and nasal cavities
the lower motor axons for the jaw muscles.
The facial nerve contains
the lower motor neurons innervating the superficial muscles of the face,
the 1° gustatory afferents to the anterior tongue
the parasympathetic preganglionic axons to parasympathetic ganglia for the lachrymal and salivary glands.
7.4 Clinical Example #1
Symptoms. The patient, who appears with a bloodshot left eye, complains of an inability to close his left eye. When asked to rise
his eyebrows, he can only elevate the right eyebrow. When asked to close both eyes, the right eyelid closes but the left eyelid is
only partially closed. Touching the right or left cornea with a wisp of cotton elicits the eye blink reflex in the right eye, but not the
left eye (Figure 7.7). However, the patient reports he can feel the cotton when it touches either eye. He can smile, whistle and show
his teeth, which indicates his lower facial muscles are functioning normally. Physical examination determines that touch, vibration,
position and pain sensations are normal over the entire the body and face. There are no other motor symptoms.
Figure 7.7
Observe the reaction to a
wisp of cotton touching the
patient's left and right
Right Left cornea.
PLAY PLAY PPLLAAYY
Right cornea Close eyes Left cornea
touch touch
c 2000 UTHSCH
Observation: You observe that the patient
has not lost cutaneous sensation in the upper left face area
does not blink when his left cornea is touched
cannot close his left eye voluntarily
You conclude that his left eye's functional loss is
not sensory
a lower motor neuron dysfunction
Pathway(s) affected: You conclude that structures in the following motor pathway have been affected
the eye blink pathway (Figure 7.8)
Spinal
trigeminal
tract
Facial Abducens
nerve nucleus Figure 7.8
genu The eye blink
Trigeminal pathway involves the
nerve trigeminal nerve,
spinal trigeminal
tract and nucleus,
the reticular
formation, and the
Spinal facial motor nucleus
trigeminal and nerve.
nucleus
Facial
nucleus Facial nerve root
c 2000 UTHSCH
Side & Level of damage: As the eye blink loss involves
only motor function
both reflex and voluntary motor functions
the upper part of the face
only one eye lid
eyelid closure
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter07.html 6/12

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Ocular Motor System (Section 3, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
Conclusion: You conclude that the damage involves
the facial nerve
a branch of the nerve innervating the upper face
a lower motor neuron paralysis of the left orbicularis oculi
motor innervation on the left side (i.e., the symptoms are ipsilesional)
When lower motor neurons are damaged, there is a flaccid paralysis of the muscle normally innervated. The action of the muscle
will be weakened or lost depending on the extent of the damage. There will be a weakened or no reflex response and the muscle
will be flaccid and may atrophy with time.
The Facial Nerve. Section of the facial nerve on one side will result in paralysis of the muscles of facial expression on the ipsilesional
side of the face. There will be an inability to close the denervated eyelid voluntarily and reflexively. The eyelids may have some
mobility if the oculomotor innervation to the levator is unaffected.
7.5 Clinical Example #2
Symptoms. The patient complains of a badly infected left eye. When he is asked to close both eyes, both eyelids close. Touching
the right cornea with a wisp of cotton elicits the eye blink reflex in the both eyes (Figure 7.9, Right). However, touching the left
cornea with a wisp of cotton does not elicit the eye blink reflex in the either eye (Figure 7.9, Left). The patient cannot detect
pinpricks to his left forehead. However, he reports that pinpricks to rest of his face are painful. He can blink, wrinkle his brows,
smile, and whistle and show his teeth, which indicates his facial muscles are functioning normally. Physical examination determines
that touch, vibration, position and pain sensations are normal over the entire the body and over the lower left and right side of his
face.
Figure 7.9
Observe the reaction to a
wisp of cotton touching the
patient's left and right
Right Left cornea.
PLAY PLAY PPLLAAYY
Right cornea Close eyes Left cornea
touch touch
c 2000 UTHSCH
Observation: You observe that the patient
responds with direct and consensual eye blink when his right cornea is touched
can close his left eye voluntarily
has lost cutaneous sensation in the upper left face area
does not blink when his left cornea is touched
You conclude that his left eye's functional loss is
not motor
sensory
Pathway(s) affected: You conclude that structures in the following reflex pathway have been affected
the eye blink pathway (Figure 7.8)
Side & Level of damage: As the eye blink loss involves
only one eye
a sensory loss
the upper part of the face
Conclusion: You conclude that the damage involves
a loss of the afferent limb of the eye blink response
the trigeminal nerve
a branch of the nerve innervating the upper face
the innervation of the left side (i.e., the symptoms are ipsilesional)
The Trigeminal Nerve. Section of the trigeminal nerve will eliminate somatosensory sensation from the face and the eye blink reflex
(e.g., with section of the left trigeminal nerve, light touch of the left cornea will not produce an eye blink in the left or right eye).
However, light touch of the right cornea will elicit a bilateral eye blink. The effect of sectioning the trigeminal nerve is to remove the
afferent input for the eye blink reflex.
7.6 Clinical Example #3
Symptoms. The patient complains of pain in her left eye. Her left pupil appears dilated and is not reactive to light directed at
either the left or right eye (Figure 7.10). The right pupil appears normal in size and reacts to light when it is directed in the right or
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter07.html 7/12

left eye. Both eyelids can be elevated and lowered and both eyes exhibit normal movement. Touch, vibration, position and pain
sensations are normal over the entire the body and face. There are no other motor symptoms.
Figure 7.10
Observe the reaction of the
patient's pupils to light
directed in the left or right
Right Left eye.
PLAY RESET PPLLAAYY
LLiigghhtt rriigghhtt eeyyee Light left eye
c 2000 UTHSCH
Observation: You observe that the patient has
a left pupil that does not react to light directly or consensually
a right pupil that reacts to light directly and consensually
normal eye movements
You conclude that his left eye's functional loss is
not sensory (the right pupil reacts to light directed at the left eye)
a motor dysfunction
Pathway(s) affected: You conclude that structures in the following motor pathway have been affected
the pupillary light reflex pathway (Figure 7.11)
O OO OO OO OO OO OO OO OO OO OO OO OO OO O OO O OO O O OOO OO OOO OO O
1/7/25, 10:07 AM Ocular Motor System (Section 3, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
Short ciliary nerve
Ciliary ganglion
Optic tract Oculomotor nerve
Figure 7.11
The pupillary light reflex pathway
Lateral involves the optic
geniculate nerve and the
body oculomotor nerve
and nuclei.
Brachium
Edinger-
of the
westphal
superior
nucleus
colliculus
Posterior
Pretectal
commissure
area
c 2000 UTHSCH
Side & Level of damage: As the pupillary light reflex loss
involves only one eye
involves only motor function
does not involve eyelid or ocular motility
is limited to pupil constriction in the left eye
Conclusion: You conclude that the damage
involves the motor innervation of the left iris sphincter2
involves structures peripheral to the oculomotor nucleus (i.e., eye movement unaffected)
does not involve the oculomotor nerve
involves the ciliary ganglion or the short ciliary nerve
is on the left side (i.e., the symptoms are ipsilesional)
Parasympathetic Innervation of the Eye. Section of the parasympathetic preganglionic (oculomotor nerve) or postganglionic (short
ciliary nerve) innervation to one eye will result in a loss (motor) of both the direct and consensual pupillary light responses of the
denervated eye. Section of the left short ciliary nerve or a benign lesion in the left ciliary ganglion will result in no direct response
to light in the left eye and no consensual response in the left eye when light is directed on the right eye (a.k.a., tonic pupil). When
the damage is limited to the ciliary ganglion or the short ciliary nerve, eyelid and ocular mobility are unaffected.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter07.html 8/12

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Ocular Motor System (Section 3, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
7.7 Clinical Example #4
Symptoms. The patient presents with a left eye characterized by ptosis, lateral strabismus, and dilated pupil. When asked to rise
his eyelids, he can only raise the lid of the right eye. When asked to close both eyes, both eyelids close fully. His left pupil does not
react to light directly or consensually (Figure 7.12). When asked to look to his right, his left eye moves to a central position, but no
further. The right eye is fully mobile. When the patient is asked to look straight ahead, you note his left eye remains directed to the
left and depressed. Physical examination determines that touch, vibration, position and pain sensations are normal over the entire
the body and face. There are no other motor symptoms.
Figure 7.12
The patient presents with a
left eye characterized by
ptosis, lateral strabismus
and dilated pupil. Observe
the reaction of the
Right Left patient's pupils to light
directed in the left or right
PLAY RESET PPLLAAYY
eye.
LLiigghhtt rriigghhtt eeyyee Light left eye
c 2000 UTHSCH
Observation: You observe that the patient
has not lost cutaneous sensation in the face area
has a left ptosis
cannot adduct his left eye (i.e., move it toward the nose)
has a left dilated pupil that is non reactive to light in either eye
You conclude that his left eye's functional loss is
not sensory
a lower motor neuron dysfunction
involving an autonomic dysfunction
Pathway(s) affected: You conclude that structures in the following motor pathway have been affected
the pupillary/oculomotor pathway (Figure 7.11)
Side & Level of damage: As the ocular loss involves
only motor function
both reflex and voluntary motor functions
both somatic and autonomic functions
only the left eye
Conclusion: You conclude that the damage
involves the oculomotor nerve
is a lower motor neuron paralysis of the superior levator palpebrae
is a lower motor neuron paralysis of the medial, superior & inferior rectus muscles and inferior oblique muscles of the eye
is an autonomic disorder involving the axons of the Edinger-Westphal nucleus
is on the left side (i.e., the symptoms are ipsilesional)
The Oculomotor Nerve. Section of the oculomotor nerve produces a non-reactive pupil in the ipsilesional side as well as other
symptoms related to oculomotor nerve damage (e.g., ptosis and lateral strabismus). Section of the oculomotor nerve on one side
will result in paralysis of the superior levator palpebrae, which normally elevates the eyelid. It will also paralyze the medial, superior
& inferior rectus muscles and the inferior oblique, which will allow the lateral rectus to deviate the eye laterally and the superior
oblique to depress the eye. The parasympathetic preganglionic axons of the Edinger-Westphal nucleus, which normally travel in the
oculomotor nerve, will be cut off from the ciliary ganglion, disrupting the circuit normally used to control the iris sphincter response
to light.
7.8 Clinical Example #5
Symptoms. The patient complains of reduced vision in the left eye. Pupil size in both eyes appears normal. However, both pupils
do not appear to constrict as rapidly and strongly when light is directed into his left eye (Figure 7.13). That is, compared to the
response to light in the left eye, light in the right eye produces a more rapid constriction and smaller pupil in both eyes. Physical
examination determines that touch, vibration, position and pain sensations are normal over the entire the body and over the lower
left and right side of his face.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter07.html 9/12

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Ocular Motor System (Section 3, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
Figure 7.13
Observe the reaction of the
patient's pupils to light
directed in the left or right
RR ii gg hh tt LeLfetft eye.
PLAY RESET PPLLAAYY
LLiigghhtt rriigghhtt eeyyee Light left eye
c 2000 UTHSCH
Observation: You observe that the patient's pupils
respond when light is directed into either eye
has weaker direct and consensual responses to light directed in the left eye
You conclude that his left eye's functional loss is
not motor
sensory (because the responses in both eyes are weaker when light is directed in the left eye)
Pathway(s) affected: You conclude that structures in the following motor pathway have been affected
the pupillary light reflex pathway (Figure 7.11)
Side & Level of damage: As the pupillary light response deficit involves
only stimulation of one eye
a sensory loss
the left eye
Conclusion: You conclude that the damage
is in the afferent limb of the pupillary light response
involves the optic nerve or retina
is on the left side (i.e., the symptoms are ipsilesional)
produced a left pupillary afferent defect
The Optic Nerve. Partial damage of the retina or optic nerve reduces the afferent component of the pupillary reflex circuit. The
reduced afferent input to the pretectal areas is reflected in weakened direct and consensual pupillary reflex responses in both eyes
(a.k.a., a relative afferent pupillary defect).
Section of one optic nerve will result in the complete loss of the direct pupillary light reflex but not the consensual reflex of the
blinded eye. That is, if the left optic nerve is sectioned, light directed on the left (blind) eye will not elicit a pupillary response in the
left eye (direct reflex) or the right eye (consensual response). However, light directed in the right eye will elicit pupillary responses
in the right eye and the left (blind) eye. The effect of sectioning one optic nerve is to remove the afferent input for the direct reflex
of the blinded eye and the afferent input for the consensual reflex of the normal eye. Section of one optic tract will not eliminate
the direct or consensual reflex of either eye as the surviving optic tract contains optic nerve fibers from both eyes. However, the
responses to light in both eyes may be weaker because of the reduced afferent input to the ipsilesional pretectal area.
7.9 Clinical Example #6
Symptoms. A patient who is suffering from the late stages of syphilis is sent to you for a neuro-ophthalmological work-up. His
vision is normal when corrected for refractive errors. He has normal ocular mobility and his eyelids can be elevated and depressed
at will. Examination of his pupillary responses indicates a loss of the pupillary light reflex (no pupil constriction to light in either eye)
but normal pupillary accommodation response (pupil constricts when the patient's eyes are directed from a distant object to one
nearby).
Observation: You observe that the patient has normal vision but that his pupils
do not respond when light is directed into the either of his eyes
do respond during accommodation
You conclude that his eye's functional loss is
not sensory (his vision is normal)
motor (the pupillary light responses in both eyes are absent)
higher-order motor (because he has a normal pupillary accommodation response)
Pathway(s) affected: You conclude that structure(s) in the
accommodation pathway have not been damaged (Figure 7.14)
pupillary light reflex pathway have been damaged (Figure 7.11)
Side & Level of damage: As the pupillary response deficit
does not involve a sensory loss
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter07.html 10/12

does not involve the pupil accommodation response
involves only the pupillary light reflex response
Conclusion: You conclude that the damage
involves the pretectal area bilaterally
spared the supraoculomotor area
produced the Argyll Robertson response
O OO OO OO OO OO OO OO OO OO OO OO OO OO O OO O OO O O OOO OO OOO OO O
1/7/25, 10:07 AM Ocular Motor System (Section 3, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
Short ciliary nerve c 2000 UTHSCH
Ciliary ganglion
Figure 7.14
The accommodation
Optic tract Oculomotor nerve
pathway includes the
supraoculomotor area,
Visual association cortex which functions as a corticotectal fibers "higher-order" motor
Lateral control stage controlling
geniculate the motor neurons and
nucleus Optic radiation parasympathetic neurons
to striate cortex (i.e., the Edinger-Westphal
neurons) of the oculomotor
nucleus. This area was
Edinger-
spared by syphilis.
Oculomotor westphal
nucleus nucleus
Supraoculomotor
area
In the Argyll Robertson response, there is an absence of the pupillary light reflex with a normal pupillary accommodation
response. The Argyll Robertson response is attributed to bilateral damage to pretectal areas (which control the pupillary light reflex)
with sparing of the supraoculomotor area (which controls the pupillary accommodation reflex).
The accommodation response involves many of the structures involved in the pupillary light response and, with the exception of the
pretectal area and supraoculomotor area, damage to either pathway will produce common the symptoms. The most common
complaint involving the accommodation response is its loss with aging (i.e., presbyopia). Recall that presbyopia most commonly
results from structural changes in the lens which impedes the lens accommodation response.
7.10 Summary
This chapter described three types of ocular motor responses (the eye blink, pupillary light and accommodation responses) and
reviewed the nature of the responses and the effectors, efferent neurons, higher-order motor control neurons (if any), and afferent
neurons normally involved in performing these ocular responses. Table I summarizes these structures and the function(s) of these
ocular motor responses. Readers should understand the anatomical basis for disorders that result from damage to components of
neural circuit controlling these responses.
Table I
Classification of Consensual Ocular Responses & Their Motor Control Structures
Ocular
Function Afferent Input* & Motor Control Structures
Responses
Free Nerve Endings in cornea that are afferent endings of the Trigeminal Nerve,
Ganglion, Root & Spinal Trigeminal Tract*
Protects cornea Spinal Trigeminal Nucleus*
from contact
Eye Blink Reflex
with foreign Reticular Formation (bilaterally to)
objects
Facial Motor Nuclei & Facial Nerves
Orbicularis Oculi
Pupillary Light Decreases pupil
Reflex size Retina, Optic Nerve, Chiasm & Tracts and Brachium of Superior Colliculus*
(constriction) –
reduces the Pretectal Areas of Midbrain (bilaterally to)
amount of light
that enters the Edinger-Westphal Nuclei & Oculomotor Nerves
eye.
Ciliary Ganglia & Short Ciliary Nerves
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter07.html 11/12

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Ocular Motor System (Section 3, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of N…
Iris Sphincters
Visual System* including Visual Association Cortex
Increases depth
Pupillary of focus of eye
Supraoculomotor Nuclei (bilaterally to)
Accommodation lens system
Edinger-Westphal Nuclei & Nerve III
Lens Increases
Ciliary Ganglia & Short Ciliary Nerves
Accommodation refractive power
of lens
Iris Sphincters & Ciliary Muscles
Visual System* including Visual Association Cortex
Eyes directed Supraoculomotor Nuclei (bilaterally to)
Convergence nasally during
accommodation Oculomotor Nuclei
Medial Rectus Muscles
* Afferent structures proving sensory input.
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
A patient is capable of pupillary constriction during accommodation but not in response to a light
directed to either eye. The lesion is most likely present in the...
A. optic nerve
B. abducens nucleus
C. Edinger-Westphal nucleus
D. pretectal areas
E. supraoculomotor nucleus
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter07.html 12/12



1/7/25, 10:07 AM Disorders of the Motor System (Section 3, Chapter 6) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depart…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 3: Motor Systems
Search
Chapter 6: Disorders of the Motor System
James Knierim, Ph.D., Department of Neuroscience, The Johns Hopkins University
Last Review 20 Oct 2020
The previous motor system chapters have deconstructed the
motor system into its component parts, in an effort to
FFrriieeddrreeiicchh''ss AAttaaxxiiaa vv44 66 33
portray how the brain’s “divide and conquer” strategy
assigns different motor control tasks to different brain
regions. This chapter describes the types of disorders that
result from damage or disease to different parts of the
motor system. In the process, the different components of
the motor system are reviewed to see how they work
together to produce the fluid, effortless body movements
that we take for granted. An emphasis is placed on trying to
explain the causes and symptoms of motor system
disorders in terms of the basic principles of neuroanatomy
and neuronal function that you learned in the earlier
chapters.
6.1 Lower Motor Neuron Syndrome
Video of Clinical Correlate Lecture on Friedreich's Ataxia
The first level of the motor system hierarchy is the spinal cord, the location of the alpha motor neurons that constitute the “final
common pathway” of all motor commands. Alpha motor neurons directly innervate skeletal muscle, causing the contractions that
produce all movements. Reflex circuits and other circuitry within the spinal cord underlie the automatic processing of many of the
direct commands to the muscles (the “nuts and bolts” processing), thereby freeing higher-order areas to concentrate on more
global, task-related processing.
Motor system dysfunction can result from damage or disease at any level of the motor system hierarchy and side-loops. Differences
in the symptoms that result from damage at different levels allow the clinician to localize where in the hierarchy the damage is
likely to be. Damage to alpha motor neurons results in a characteristic set of symptoms called the lower motor neuron syndrome
(lower motor neurons refer to alpha motor neurons in the spinal cord and brain stem; all motor system neurons higher in the
hierarchy are referred to as upper motor neurons). This damage usually arises from certain diseases that selectively affect alpha
motor neurons (such as polio) or from localized lesions near the spinal cord. Lower motor neuron syndrome is characterized by the
following symptoms:
1. The effects can be limited to small groups of muscles. Recall that a motor neuron pool is a nucleus of alpha motor
neurons that innervate a single muscle (link to Motor Unit Figure 2). Furthermore, nearby motor neuron pools control nearby
muscles. Thus, restricted damage to lower motor neurons, either within the spinal cord or at the ventral roots, will affect only
a restricted group of muscles.
2. Muscle atrophy. When alpha motor neurons die, the muscle fibers that they innervate become deprived of necessary trophic
factors and eventually the muscle itself atrophies.
3. Weakness. Because of the damage to alpha motor neurons and the atrophy of muscles, weakness is profound in lower motor
neuron disorders.
4. Fasciculation. Damaged alpha motor neurons can produce spontaneous action potentials. These spikes cause the muscle
fibers that are part of that neuron’s motor unit to fire, resulting in a visible twitch (called a fasciculation) of the affected
muscle (Figure 6.1).
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter06.html 1/8

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Disorders of the Motor System (Section 3, Chapter 6) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depart…
FASCICULATIONS
FIBRILLATIONS
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 6.1
Fasciculations and fibrillations. Click on buttons to see demonstration.
5. Fibrillation. With further degeneration of the alpha motor neuron, only remnants of the axons near the muscle fibers remain.
These individual axon fibers can also generate spontaneous action potentials; however, these action potentials will only cause
individual muscle fibers to contract. This spontaneous twitching of individual muscle fibers is called a fibrillation (Fig. 1).
Fibrillations are too small to be seen as a visible muscle contraction. They can only be detected with electrophysiological
recordings of the muscle activity (an electromyogram).
6. Hypotonia. Because alpha motor neurons are the only way to stimulate extrafusal muscle fibers, the loss of these neurons
causes a decrease in muscle tone.
7. Hyporeflexia. The myotatic (stretch) reflex is weak or absent with lower motor neuron disorders, because the alpha
motor neurons that cause muscle contraction are damaged.
6.2 Upper Motor Neuron Syndrome
Damage to any part of the motor system hierarchy above the level of alpha motor neurons (not including the side loops) results in
a set of symptoms termed the upper motor neuron syndrome. Some of these symptoms are opposite of those of lower motor
neuron disorders. Thus, one of the critical determinations a clinician must make is whether a patient presenting with motor
problems has an upper motor neuron disorder or a lower motor neuron disorder.
Upper motor neuron disorders typically arise from such causes as stroke, tumors, and blunt trauma. For example, strokes to the
middle cerebral artery, lateral striate artery, or the medial striate artery can cause damage to the lateral surface of cortex or to the
internal capsule, where the descending axons of the corticospinal tract collect. The symptoms of upper motor neuron syndrome
are:
1. The effects extend to large groups of muscles. Recall from the Motor Cortex chapter that muscles from different body
parts are activated by stimulation of parts of motor cortex, consistent with the notion that motor cortex represents
movements that are controlled by many joints, rather than individual muscles. Thus, a stroke in a particular part of motor
cortex will affect the activation of many muscles in the body. Likewise, a stroke that affects the internal capsule or crus
cerebri could affect muscles on the entire contralateral side of the body.
2. Atrophy is rare. Because alpha motor neurons are present, muscles will continue to receive trophic agents necessary for
their survival. A mild amount of atrophy may result from disuse, but it will not be as pronounced as that resulting from a
lower motor neuron disorder.
3. Weakness. Upper motor neuron disorders produce a graded weakness of movement (paresis), which differs from the
complete loss of muscle activity caused by paralysis (plegia).
4. Absence of fasciculations. Because alpha motor neurons themselves are spared, fasciculations do not occur.
5. Absence of fibrillations. Likewise, fibrillations do not occur.
6. Hypertonia. Upper motor neuron disorders result in an increase in muscle tone. Recall that descending motor pathways can
modulate the intrinsic circuitry that is present in the spinal cord. This modulatory input can be either inhibitory or excitatory.
Through mechanisms that are not well understood, the loss of descending inputs tends to result in an increased firing rate of
alpha and/or gamma motor neurons. The higher firing rate causes an increase in the resting level of muscle activity, resulting
in hypertonia.
7. Hyperreflexia. Because of the loss of inhibitory modulation from descending pathways, the myotatic (stretch) reflex is
exaggerated in upper motor neuron disorders. The stretch reflex is a major clinical diagnostic test of whether a motor disorder
is caused by damage to upper or lower motor neurons.
8. Clonus. Sometimes the stretch reflex is so strong that the muscle contracts a number of times in a 5-7 Hz oscillation when
the muscle is rapidly stretched and then held at a constant length. This abnormal oscillation, called clonus, can be felt by the
clinician.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter06.html 2/8

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Disorders of the Motor System (Section 3, Chapter 6) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depart…
9. Initial contralateral flaccid paralysis. In the initial stages after damage to motor cortex, the contralateral side of the body
shows a flaccid paralysis. Gradually, over the course of a few weeks, motor function returns to the contralateral side of the
body. This gradual recovery of function results from the ability of other motor pathways to take over some of the lost
functions. Recall that there are multiple descending motor pathways by which high-order information can reach the spinal
cord. Thus, descending pathways such as the rubrospinal and the reticulospinal tracts, which receive direct or indirect cortical
input, can take over the function lost by the damage to the corticospinal tract. Moreover, primary motor cortex itself is
capable of reorganizing itself to recover some lost function. Thus, if the part of motor cortex that controls a certain body
movement is damaged, neighboring parts of the motor cortex that are undamaged can, to some extent, alter their function to
help compensate for the damaged areas. The one major exception to the recovery of function is that fine control of the distal
musculature will not be regained after a lesion to the corticospinal tract. Recall that there are direct connections from primary
motor cortex neurons to alpha motor neurons controlling the fingers. These connections presumably underlie our abilities to
manipulate objects with great precision and to do such tasks as playing a piano and performing microsurgery. None of the
other descending pathways have direct connections onto spinal motor neurons, and none of them can compensate for the loss
of fine motor control of the hands and fingers after damage to the corticospinal tract.
10. Spasticity. A clinical sign of upper motor neuron disorder is a velocity dependent resistance to passive movement of the limb.
If the clinician moves a patient’s limb slowly, there may be little resistance to the movement. As the passive movement
becomes quicker, however, at a certain point the muscle will sharply resist the movement. This is referred to as a “spastic
catch.” The mechanism for this spasticity is not entirely known, but altered firing rate of gamma motor neurons and their
regulating interneurons may be involved, as well as an increase in alpha motor neuron activity, causing an inappropriately
powerful stretch reflex to a fast stretch of the muscle. Sometimes, the resistance becomes so great that the autogenic
inhibition reflex is initiated, causing a sudden drop in the resistance; this is referred to as the clasp-knife reflex.
Normal extensor plantar
response (Flexion)
PLAY
Figure 6.2
Babinski sign.
11. Babinski sign. A classic neurological test for corticospinal tract damage is the Babinski test. In this test, the clinician strokes
the sole of the foot firmly with an instrument. This elicits a normal plantar response in normal individuals, as the toes curl
inward. In patients with an upper motor neuron disorder, however, an abnormal extensor plantar response is elicited, as the
big toe extends upward and the remaining toes fan out. This is called a positive Babinski sign (Figure 6.2). Interestingly, the
positive Babinski sign is normal in infants for the first 2 years of life. During development, however, the reflex changes to the
normal adult pattern, presumably as corticospinal circuits mature.
In addition to the above symptoms, damage to the motor cortex and association cortex can result in impairments in motor planning
and strategies and in an inability to perform complex motor tasks. Performance of simple tasks is intact, but patients are unable to
perform complex, practiced tasks. This symptom is known as apraxia. For example, patients may be unable to arrange a set of
blocks to match an example block-structure in front of them. They can move the blocks individually, but cannot come up with a
motor plan to arrange them properly. This disorder is known as constructional apraxia. Other apraxias include dressing apraxia
(inability to dress oneself) and verbal apraxia (inability to coordinate mouth movements to produce speech).
Paralysis
A section or crush of the spinal cord will result in paralysis of all parts of the body below the damaged region. Even though such
an injury occurs in the spinal cord, it is not considered a lower motor neuron disorder, as the alpha motor neurons themselves are
not directly damaged. If the damage occurs at the cervical level, then all four limbs will be paralyzed (quadriplegia). If the
damage occurs below the cervical enlargement, then only the legs are paralyzed (paraplegia). Other terms used to describe
patterns of paralysis are hemiplegia (paralysis to one side of the body) and monoplegia (paralysis of a single limb).
6.3 Disorders of the Basal Ganglia
The basal ganglia have historically been considered part of the motor system because of the variety of motor deficits that occur
when they are damaged. The types of symptoms that result from basal ganglia disorders can be divided into two classes:
dyskinesias, which are abnormal, involuntary movements, and akinesias, which are abnormal, involuntary postures. Because the
basal ganglia were once considered to form a separate, “extrapyramidal” motor system, these symptoms are called
extrapyramidal disorders.
Dyskinesias
1. Resting tremors are most often associated with Parkinson’s disease. When the patient is at rest, certain body parts will
display a 4-7 Hz tremor. For example, the thumb and forefingers will move back-and-forth against each other in a
characteristic tremor called “pill-rolling tremor.” The tremor stops when the body part engages in active movement.
2. Athetosis is characterized by involuntary, writhing movements, especially of the hands and face.
3. Chorea, which derives from the Greek word for “dance,” is characterized by continuous, writhing movements of the entire
body. It is viewed by some as an extreme form of athetosis. Chorea is most closely identified with Huntington’s disease.
4. Ballismus is characterized by involuntary, ballistic movements of the extremities.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter06.html 3/8

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Disorders of the Motor System (Section 3, Chapter 6) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depart…
5. Tardive dyskinesia can result from the long-term use of antipsychotic drugs that target the dopamine system. It is
characterized by involuntary movements of the tongue, face, arms, lips, and other body parts. It is thought to occur as the
result of an imbalance between the D1 and D2 receptors, thereby favoring the direct pathway over the indirect pathway.
Akinesias
1. Rigidity is a resistance to passive movement of the limb. Unlike spasticity, rigidity does not depend on the speed of the
passive movement. In some patients, this resistance is so great that it is referred to as lead-pipe rigidity, because moving
the patient’s limb feels like bending a lead pipe. In some patients, this rigidity is coupled with tremors and is called cogwheel
rigidity, as moving the limb feels to the clinician like the catching and release of gears. As with spasticity, the mechanism is
not entirely understood, but may result from continuous firing of alpha motor neurons causing a continual contraction of the
muscle.
2. Dystonia is the involuntary adoption of abnormal postures, as agonist and antagonist muscles both contract and become so
rigid that the patient cannot maintain normal posture.
3. Bradykinesia refers to a slowness, or poverty, of movement.
A number of well-known movement disorders are associated with basal ganglia dysfunction. We shall concentrate on 3 of the most
well-understood: Parkinson’s disease, Huntington’s disease, and hemiballismus. To understand how these disorders result in the
specific symptoms, it is necessary to review the circuit anatomy of the basal ganglia that was presented in the Basal Ganglia
chapter.
Parkinson’s disease
Parkinson’s disease results from the death of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta. It is characterized by
a resting tremor, but the most debilitating symptom is severe bradykinesia or akinesia. In advanced cases, patients have difficulty
initiating movements, although involuntary, reflexive movements can be normal. It is as if the loss of the substantia nigra neurons
has put a brake on the output of motor cortex, inhibiting voluntary motor commands from descending to the brain stem and spinal
cord.
Although the cause of Parkinson’s disease is still not known, much has been learned in the past 15 years from the development of
an animal model of Parkinson’s disease. This model was discovered by accident when a number of young patients presented with
symptoms remarkably similar to Parkinson’s disease. These patients were drug addicts who had been taking an artificially
manufactured drug called MPTP (1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyradine). This drug destroyed the dopaminergic neurons in
the substantia nigra, leading to a Parkinsonian disorder. Laboratory animals injected with MPTP have since become a leading model
for understanding the disease and developing treatments.
How does the loss of the dopaminergic neurons cause the poverty of movements associated with Parkinson’s disease (Figure 6.3)?
Recall from the Basal Ganglia chapter that the substantia nigra pars compacta projects to both direct pathway and indirect
pathways neurons in the striatum. Because there are two different types of dopamine receptors, substantia nigra activity excites
the direct pathway and inhibits the indirect pathway. The net effect of the direct pathway is to excite motor cortex, and the net
effect of the indirect pathway is to inhibit motor cortex. Thus, the loss of the nigrostriatal dopaminergic pathway upsets the fine
balance of excitation and inhibition in the basal ganglia and reduces the excitation of motor cortex. In ways that are not
understood, this reduction of thalamic excitation interferes with the ability of the motor cortex to generate commands for voluntary
movement, resulting in the poverty of movement of Parkinsonian patients. It is as if all of the motor programs stored in cortex are
constantly inhibited by the indirect pathway, with not enough excitation of the direct pathway for the desired motor program to
become activated.
Caudate nucleus From PARKINSON'S DISEASE
To Indirect pathway cerebral
cerebral cortex RESET
cortex
Nigrostriatal
pathway
Direct
Centromedian pathway
nucleus
Thalamus
Striatum
(Caudate
Subthalamic +Putamen)
nucleus
Substantia nigra
Globus pallidus
(pars compacta) Globus pallidus
external segment
internal segment
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 6.3
Parkinson’s disease results from degeneration of the nigrostriatal pathway. Three therapeutic
interventions are L-Dopa therapy, pallidotomy, and deep brain stimulation.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter06.html 4/8

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Disorders of the Motor System (Section 3, Chapter 6) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depart…
There is no cure for Parkinson’s disease, but a number of effective treatments exist. The earliest effective treatment was developed
when it was first discovered that Parkinson’s disease was caused by a loss of dopaminergic neurons. Because dopamine itself does
not cross the blood-brain barrier, L-Dopa, a chemical precursor to dopamine, was used to replenish the supply of dopamine.
Amazingly, flooding the system with L-Dopa resulted in profound improvements in the symptoms of patients. Unfortunately, this
improvement is temporary, and typically symptoms return after a number of years. Surgical intervention, such as making lesions to
the globus pallidus internal segment (pallidotomy), has shown effectiveness in some patients. In recent years, a new therapy,
deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus, has been gaining in popularity. In this treatment, an electrical stimulator is
implanted in the subthalamic nucleus. When the electrical current is turned on to stimulate the nucleus, the patient’s symptoms
disappear immediately. It is not known why this procedure works, or what its long-term efficacy is. Because the projection from the
subthalamic nucleus is excitatory onto globus pallidus neurons, which inhibit the thalamus, it is paradoxical that such stimulation
should increase motor cortex activity. One thought is that the stimulation might actually overload the subthalamic nucleus, thereby
inhibiting it and disinhibiting the thalamus.
Huntington’s disease
Huntington’s disease (also known as Woody Guthrie Disease) is a genetic disorder that is caused by an abnormally large
number of repeats of the nucleotide sequence CAG on chromosome 4. Normal individuals have 9-35 repeats of this sequence;
mutations that cause larger repeats give rise to Huntington’s disease. It is an autosomal dominant mutation, such that the offspring
of a patient with Huntington’s disease has a 50% chance of inheriting the mutation. Individuals with the mutated gene will
invariably develop Huntington’s disease, usually near middle age. The affected gene codes for a protein known as huntingtin, the
function of which is not known. The effect of the mutated version of the gene, however, is to kill the indirect pathway neurons in the
striatum, particularly those of the caudate nucleus.
Huntington’s disease is also known as Huntington’s chorea because it is characterized by a continuous, choreiform movements of
the body (especially the limbs and face). In addition, the disease in advanced stages is associated with dementia. There is at
present no cure or effective treatment for Huntington’s disease.
Why does the loss of indirect pathway neurons in the striatum cause the dyskinesias of Huntington’s disease (Figure 6.4)? Recall
that the net effect of the indirect pathway is to inhibit motor cortex. With the loss of these neurons, the excitatory effect of the
direct pathway is no longer kept in check by the inhibition of the indirect pathway. Thus, the motor cortex gets too much excitatory
input from the thalamus, disrupting its normal functioning and sending involuntary movement commands to the brain stem and
spinal cord. Because inappropriate motor programs are not inhibited normally, the cortex continuously sends involuntary commands
for movements and movement sequences to the muscles.
Caudate Indirect
nucleus pathway From HUNTINGTON'S DISEASE
To cerebral
cerebral cortex RESET
cortex
Nigrostriatal
pathway
Direct
pathway
Centromedian
nucleus
Thalamus
Subthalamic
nucleus
Substantia nigra
(pars compacta) Globus pallidus Globus pallidus Striatum
internal segment external segment (Caudate
c 2000 UTHSCH +Putamen)
Figure 6.4
Huntington’s disease results from degeneration of the indirect pathways cells of the striatum.
Hemiballismus
Hemiballismus results from a unilateral lesion to the subthalamic nucleus, usually caused by a stroke. This lesion results in
ballismus on the contralateral side of the body, while the ipsilateral side is normal (hence the term hemiballismus). The involuntary,
ballistic movements result from the loss of the excitatory subthalamic nucleus projection to the globus pallidus (Figure 6.5).
Because the globus pallidus internal segment normally inhibits the thalamus when excited, the loss of the subthalamic component
lessens the inhibition of the thalamus, making it more likely to send spurious excitation to the motor cortex. Some surgical
operations have been performed to relieve the symptoms of hemiballismus, and new pharmacological treatments are in use to
relieve the disorder.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter06.html 5/8

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Disorders of the Motor System (Section 3, Chapter 6) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depart…
Caudate Indirect
nucleus pathway From HEMIBALLISMUS
To cerebral
cerebral cortex RESET
cortex
Nigrostriatal
pathway
Direct
pathway
Centromedian
nucleus
Thalamus
Subthalamic
nucleus
Substantia nigra
(pars compacta) Globus pallidus Globus pallidus Striatum
internal segment external segment (Caudate
c 2000 UTHSCH +Putamen)
Figure 6.5
Hemiballismus results from unilateral damage to the subthalamic nucleus.
6.4 Disorders of the Cerebellum
Like the basal ganglia, the cerebellum has historically been considered part of the motor system because damage to it produces
motor disturbances. Unlike the basal ganglia, damage to the cerebellum does not result in lack of movement or poverty of
movement. Instead, cerebellar dysfunction is characterized by a lack of movement coordination. Also unlike basal ganglia (and
motor cortex), damage to the cerebellum causes impairments on the ipsilateral side of the body.
1. Ataxia is a general term used to describe the general impairments in movement coordination and accuracy that accompany
cerebellar damage. There are two major forms of cerebellar ataxia.
a. Disturbances of posture or gait result from lesions to the vestibulocerebellum. Patients have difficulty maintaining
posture because of the loss of the fine-control mechanisms programmed by cerebellar circuits that translate vestibular
signals into precise, well-timed muscle contractions to counter small sways in the body. As a result, patients often
develop abnormal gait and stances to compensate. For example, the feet are often spaced widely apart when the patient
stands still, as this provides a more stable base to maintain balance. In addition, patients display a staggering gait, with
a tendency to fall toward the side of the lesion. This gait resembles that of a drunken individual; indeed, alcohol is
known to affect the firing of Purkinje cells, which may explain the loss of coordination that accompanies inebriation.
b. Decomposition of movement results from the loss of the cerebellum’s ability to coordinate the activity and timing of
many muscle groups to produce smooth, fluid movements. Instead, cerebellar patient decompose each movement into
its component parts, performing them in serial, rather than all at once in a coordinated fashion.
NORMAL
CEREBELLUM LESION
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 6.6
Dysdiadochokinesia. A normal subject can
easily perform rhythmic movements like
rapidly pronating and supinating the hands
and forearms (click NORMAL). A patient with
a cerebellum lesion cannot perform this task
2. Dysmetria refers to the inappropriate force and distance that characterizes target-directed movements of cerebellar patients.
For example, in attempting to grab a cup, they may move their hand outward with too much force or may move it too far,
with the result of knocking over the cup instead of grabbing it.
3. Dysdiadochokinesia refers to the inability of cerebellar patients to perform rapidly alternating movements, such as rapidly
pronating and supinating the hands and forearms (Figure 6.6). This diagnostic sign results from the lack of the cerebellum’s
ability to coordinate the timing of muscle groups, alternately contracting and inhibiting antagonistic muscles, to produce the
rhythmic movements.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter06.html 6/8

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Disorders of the Motor System (Section 3, Chapter 6) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depart…
4. Scanning speech refers to the often staccato nature of speech of cerebellar patients. The production of speech is a motor
act, as muscles of the jaw, tongue, and larynx need to work in unison to produce words and sounds. Cerebellar patients have
difficulty in coordinating these muscle groups appropriately, and therefore their speech tends to be slow and disjointed.
5. Hypotonia is another symptom of cerebellar damage. There is a decreased, pendulous myotatic reflex, as the decreased
muscle resistance tends to cause the limb to swing back and forth after the initial reflex contraction.
NORMAL
button ABNORMAL
6. c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 6.7
Intention tremor. A normal subject can make a
directed movement to a target (click NORMAL).
A patient with a cerebellum lesion displays an
intention tremor, in which the movement starts
smoothly toward the target but then oscillates
back and forth until the hand slowly contacts
the target (click ABNORMAL).
Intention tremor refers to the increasingly oscillatory trajectory of a cerebellar patient’s limb in a target-directed movement
(Figure 6.7). For example, the hand will start out on a straight path toward the target, but as it gets closer, the hand begins
to move back and forth, and the patient must slow down the movement and very carefully approach the target. Note that this
tremor contrasts with the resting tremor of Parkinson’s disease, which disappears when the movement is made. Intention
tremor is absent when the hand is still, but appears toward the end of a target-directed movement.
7. Nystagmus is an oscillatory movement of the eyes, resulting from damage to the vestibulocerebellum. Recall that one
function of the cerebellum is to fine-tune the gain of the vestibuloocular response. Damage to the cerebellum can disrupt this
circuitry, resulting in a continuing oscillation of the eyes.
8. Delay in initiating movements. Cerebellar patients take longer to initiate movements, often because they must actively
plan sequences of movements that are performed effortlessly by normal individuals.
9. In addition to movement disorders, cerebellar patients also demonstrate subtle cognitive deficits, such as an impaired
ability to estimate time intervals.
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
Following a strenuous workout with his neighborhood team, a right-handed, 52-year-old former
professional basketball player awoke the next morning with paralysis of the right lower extremity. A
neurological exam revealed an exaggerated stretch reflex. There was no disturbance of position
sense, pain sensation or tactile discrimination. Where is the problem localized?
A. Anterior (ventral) horn, right side.
B. Cerebellum, right side.
C. Posterior (dorsal) columns of spinal cord, right side.
D. Left motor cortex, lateral (inferior) portion of motor map.
E. Left motor cortex, medial (superior) portion of motor map.
Question 2 A B C D E
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter06.html 7/8

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Disorders of the Motor System (Section 3, Chapter 6) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depart…
All of the following are examples of dyskinesia EXCEPT:
A. Athetosis
B. Chorea
C. Tremors
D. Rigidity
E. Ballismus
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter06.html 8/8



1/7/25, 10:07 AM Cerebellum (Section 3, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobiolog…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 3: Motor Systems
Search
Chapter 5: Cerebellum
James Knierim, Ph.D., Department of Neuroscience, The Johns Hopkins University
Last Review 20 Oct 2020
5.1 Overview: Functions of the Cerebellum
Figure 5.1
Cerebellum
The cerebellum (“little brain”) is a structure that is located at the back of the brain, underlying the occipital and temporal lobes of
the cerebral cortex (Figure 5.1). Although the cerebellum accounts for approximately 10% of the brain’s volume, it contains over
50% of the total number of neurons in the brain. Historically, the cerebellum has been considered a motor structure, because
cerebellar damage leads to impairments in motor control and posture and because the majority of the cerebellum’s outputs are to
parts of the motor system. Motor commands are not initiated in the cerebellum; rather, the cerebellum modifies the motor
commands of the descending pathways to make movements more adaptive and accurate. The cerebellum is involved in the
following functions:
Maintenance of balance and posture. The cerebellum is important for making postural adjustments in order to maintain
balance. Through its input from vestibular receptors and proprioceptors, it modulates commands to motor neurons to compensate
for shifts in body position or changes in load upon muscles. Patients with cerebellar damage suffer from balance disorders, and they
often develop stereotyped postural strategies to compensate for this problem (e.g., a wide-based stance).
Coordination of voluntary movements. Most movements are composed of a number of different muscle groups acting together
in a temporally coordinated fashion. One major function of the cerebellum is to coordinate the timing and force of these different
muscle groups to produce fluid limb or body movements.
Motor learning. The cerebellum is important for motor learning. The cerebellum plays a major role in adapting and fine-tuning
motor programs to make accurate movements through a trial-and-error process (e.g., learning to hit a baseball).
Cognitive functions. Although the cerebellum is most understood in terms of its contributions to motor control, it is also involved
in certain cognitive functions, such as language. Thus, like the basal ganglia, the cerebellum is historically considered as part of the
motor system, but its functions extend beyond motor control in ways that are not yet well understood.
5.2 Cerebellar Gross Anatomy
The cerebellum consists of two major parts (Figure 5.2A). The cerebellar deep nuclei (or cerebellar nuclei) are the sole output
structures of the cerebellum. These nuclei are encased by a highly convoluted sheet of tissue called the cerebellar cortex, which
contains almost all of the neurons in the cerebellum. A cross-section through the cerebellum reveals the intricate pattern of folds
and fissures that characterize the cerebellar cortex (Figure 5.3). Like the cerebral cortex, cerebellar gyri are reproducible across
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter05.html 1/10

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Cerebellum (Section 3, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobiolog…
individuals and have been identified and named. We will only be concerned with some of the larger divisions of the cerebellar
cortex.
A B
Anterior lobe
Primary fissure
Vermis
Figure 5.2
(A) Cerebellar deep
nuclei and cerebellar
cortex in an idealized
brain section. (B)
External morphology
Posterior lobe
of the cerebellum.
Cerebellar cortex
Cerebellar deep nuclei c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 5.3
Midsagittal cross-
section of cerebellum
showing the three
primary lobes of the
cerebellum.
Divisions of the cerebellum. Two major fissures running mediolaterally divide the cerebellar cortex into three primary
subdivisions (Figure 5.2B and Figure 5.3). The posterolateral fissure separates the flocculonodular lobe from the corpus
cerebelli, and the primary fissure separates the corpus cerebelli into a posterior lobe and an anterior lobe (Figure 5.4). The
cerebellum is also divided sagittally into three zones that run from medial to lateral (Fig. 5.4). The vermis (from the Latin word for
worm) is located along the midsagittal plane of the cerebellum. Directly lateral to the vermis is the intermediate zone. Finally, the
lateral hemispheres are located lateral to the intermediate zone (there are no clear morphological borders between the
intermediate zone and the lateral hemisphere that are visible from a gross specimen).
c 2000 UTHSCH
PLAY
Anterior lobe
Primary fissure
Vermis
Posterior lobe
Figure 5.4
Divisions of cerebellum. Click PLAY to see schematic “unfolding” of cerebellum.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter05.html 2/10

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Cerebellum (Section 3, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobiolog…
Cerebellar nuclei. All outputs from the cerebellum originate from the cerebellar deep nuclei. Thus, a lesion to the cerebellar
nuclei has the same effect as a complete lesion of the entire cerebellum. It is important to know the inputs, outputs, and
anatomical relationships between the different cerebellar nuclei and the subdivisions of the cerebellum (Figure 5.5).
Cerebrocerebellum Spinocerbellum
cerebral cortex spinocerebellar tract
reticular formation
vestibular nuclei
CEREBRO CEREBELLUM
SPINOCEREBELLUM
pontine VESTIBULOCEREBELLUM
middle nuclei
SHOW ALL
cerebellar
peduncle
inferiro
cerebellar
peduncle
Vestibulocerebellum
vestibular labyrith
interposed
nuclei
vestibular nuclei
dentate
nucleus
superior
cerebellar fastigial nucleus
peduncle
VL reticular red vestibulospinal
thalamus formation nucleus tracts
lateral medial
descending descending
c 2000 UTHSCH tracts tracts
Figure 5.5
Input and output pathways of the cerebellum.
Click on the names of each cerebellum functional subdivision
(cerebrocerebellum, spinocerebellum, and vestibulocerebellum) to view
each pathway in isolation.
The cerebellar deep nuclei are the sole outputs of the cerebellum.
1. The fastigial nucleus is the most medially located of the cerebellar nuclei. It receives input from the vermis and from
cerebellar afferents that carry vestibular, proximal somatosensory, auditory, and visual information. It projects to the
vestibular nuclei and the reticular formation.
2. The interposed nuclei comprise the emboliform nucleus and the globose nucleus. They are situated lateral to the fastigial
nucleus. They receive input from the intermediate zone and from cerebellar afferents that carry spinal, proximal
somatosensory, auditory, and visual information. They project to the contralateral red nucleus (the origin of the rubrospinal
tract).
3. The dentate nucleus is the largest of the cerebellar nuclei, located lateral to the interposed nuclei. It receives input from the
lateral hemisphere and from cerebellar afferents that carry information from the cerebral cortex (via the pontine nuclei). It
projects to the contralateral red nucleus and the ventrolateral (VL) thalamic nucleus.
4. The vestibular nuclei are located outside the cerebellum, in the medulla. Hence, they are not strictly cerebellar nuclei, but
they are considered to be functionally equivalent to the cerebellar nuclei because their connectivity patterns are identical to
the cerebellar nuclei. The vestibular nuclei receive input from the flocculonodular lobe and from the vestibular labyrinth. They
project to various motor nuclei and originate the vestibulospinal tracts.
In addition to these inputs, all cerebellar nuclei and all regions of cerebellum get special inputs from the inferior olive of the medulla
(discussed below).
It is convenient to remember that the anatomical locations of the cerebellar nuclei correspond to the cerebellar cortex regions from
which they receive input. Thus, the medially located fastigial nucleus receives input from the medially located vermis; the slightly
lateral interposed nuclei receive input from the slightly lateral intermediate zone; and the most lateral dentate nucleus receives
input from the lateral hemispheres.
Cerebellar peduncles. Three fiber bundles carry the input and output of the cerebellum.
1. The inferior cerebellar peduncle (also called the restiform body) primarily contains afferent fibers from the medulla, as
well as efferents to the vestibular nuclei.
2. The middle cerebellar peduncle (also called the brachium pontis) primarily contains afferents from the pontine nuclei.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter05.html 3/10

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Cerebellum (Section 3, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobiolog…
3. The superior cerebellar peduncle (also called the brachium conjunctivum) primarily contains efferent fibers from the
cerebellar nuclei, as well as some afferents from the spinocerebellar tract.
Thus, the inputs to the cerebellum are conveyed primarily through the inferior and middle cerebellar peduncles, whereas the
outputs are conveyed primarily through the superior cerebellar peduncle. The inputs arise from the ipsilateral side of the body, and
the outputs also go to the ipsilateral side of the body. Note that this is true even for the outputs to the contralateral red nucleus.
Recall from the chapter on descending motor pathways that the rubrospinal tract immediately crosses the midline after the fibers
leave the red nucleus. Thus, cerebellar output to the red nucleus affects the ipsilateral side of the body by a double-crossed
pathway. Unlike the cerebral cortex, the cerebellum receives input from, and controls output to, the ipsilateral side of the body, and
damage to the cerebellum therefore results in deficits to the ipsilateral side of the body.
5.3 Functional Subdivisions of the Cerebellum
The anatomical subdivisions described above correspond to three major functional subdivisions of the cerebellum.
Vestibulocerebellum. The vestibulocerebellum comprises the flocculonodular lobe and its connections with the lateral
vestibular nuclei. Phylogenetically, the vestibulocerebellum is the oldest part of the cerebellum. As its name implies, it is involved
in vestibular reflexes (such as the vestibuloocular reflex; see below) and in postural maintenance.
Spinocerebellum. The spinocerebellum comprises the vermis and the intermediate zones of the cerebellar cortex, as well as
the fastigial and interposed nuclei. As its name implies, it receives major inputs from the spinocerebellar tract. Its output
projects to rubrospinal, vestibulospinal, and reticulospinal tracts. It is involved in the integration of sensory input with motor
commands to produce adaptive motor coordination.
Cerebrocerebellum. The cerebrocerebellum is the largest functional subdivision of the human cerebellum, comprising the lateral
hemispheres and the dentate nuclei. Its name derives from its extensive connections with the cerebral cortex, via the pontine
nuclei (afferents) and the VL thalamus (efferents). It is involved in the planning and timing of movements. In addition, the
cerebrocerebellum is involved in the cognitive functions of the cerebellum.
5.4 Histology and Connectivity of Cerebellar Cortex
The cerebellar cortex is divided into three layers (Figure 5.6). The innermost layer, the granule cell layer, is made of 5 x 1010 small,
tightly packed granule cells. The middle layer, the Purkinje cell layer, is only 1-cell thick. The outer layer, the molecular layer, is
made of the axons of granule cells and the dendrites of Purkinje cells, as well as a few other cell types. The Purkinje cell layer forms
the border between the granule and molecular layers.
Figure 5.6
Cerebellar circuitry. This basic pattern is repeated throughout all regions of the cerebellum.
Granule cells. Granule cells are very small, densely packed neurons that account for the huge majority of neurons in the
cerebellum. Indeed, cerebellar granule cells account for more than half of the neurons in the entire brain. These cells receive input
from mossy fibers and project to the Purkinje cells.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter05.html 4/10

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Cerebellum (Section 3, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobiolog…
Figure 5.7
Front view of Purkinje
cell.
Click PLAY to see side
view of the Purkinje
cell.
This view shows that
the cell is virtually flat
in this dimension.
Note the parallel
fibers of the granule
cells that run
PLAY
perpendicularly to the
Purkinje cell Purkinje cell.
c 2000 UTHSCH
Purkinje cells. The Purkinje cell is one of the most striking cell types in the mammalian brain. Its apical dendrites form a large fan
of finely branched processes (Figure 5.7). Remarkably, this dendritic tree is almost two-dimensional; looked at from the side, the
dendritic tree is flat (click PLAY on Figure 5.7). Moreover, all Purkinje cells are oriented in parallel. This arrangement has important
functional considerations, as we shall see below.
Other cell types. In addition to the major cell types (granule cells and Purkinje cells), the cerebellar cortex also contains various
interneuron types, including the Golgi cell, the basket cell, and the stellate cell.
Connectivity. The cerebellar cortex has a relatively simple, stereotyped connectivity pattern that is identical throughout the whole
structure. Figure 6 illustrates a simplified diagram of the connectivity of the cerebellum. Cerebellar input can be divided into two
distinct classes.
1. Mossy fibers originate in the pontine nuclei, the spinal cord, the brainstem reticular formation, and the vestibular nuclei,
and they make excitatory projections onto the cerebellar nuclei and onto granule cells in the cerebellar cortex. They are called
mossy fibers because of the tufted appearance of their synaptic contacts with granule cells. There is a large degree of
divergence in the mossy fiber-granule cell connection, as each mossy fiber innervates hundreds of granule cells. The granule
cells send axons up toward the cortical surface. Each axon bifurcates in the molecular layer, sending a collateral in opposite
directions. These fibers, called parallel fibers, run parallel to the folds of the cerebellar cortex, where they make excitatory
synapses with Purkinje cells along the way (Figure 5.7, rotated view after PLAY). The two-dimensional arbors of the Purkinje
cell dendrites are oriented perpendicular to the parallel fibers. Thus, the arrangement of Purkinje cells and parallel fibers
resembles telephone lines running between telephone poles. Each parallel fiber makes contact with hundreds of Purkinje cells;
because of the high degree of divergence of the mossy fiber-granule cell synapses, the firing of each Purkinje cell can be
influenced (disynaptically) by thousands of mossy fibers.
2. Climbing fibers originate exclusively in the inferior olive and make excitatory projections onto the cerebellar nuclei and
onto the Purkinje cells of the cerebellar cortex. They are called climbing fibers because their axons climb and wrap around
the dendrites of the Purkinje cell like a climbing vine. Each Purkinje cell receives a single, extremely powerful input from a
single climbing fiber. In contrast to mossy fibers and parallel fibers, each climbing fiber contacts only 10 Purkinje cells on
average, making ~300 synapses with each Purkinje cell. Thus, the climbing fiber is a restricted, but extremely powerful,
excitatory input onto Purkinje cells.
The Purkinje cell is the sole source of output from the cerebellar cortex. It is important to note that Purkinje cells make
inhibitory connections onto the cerebellar nuclei. (Note the distinction between the Purkinje cells, which constitute the sole output
of the cerebellar cortex, and the cerebellar nuclei, which constitute the sole output of the entire cerebellum.) Almost all of the
spikes generated by the Purkinje cell are caused by its parallel-fiber inputs. These inputs cause the Purkinje cell to fire at a high
resting rate (~70 spikes/sec), tonically inhibiting its cerebellar nucleus targets. The powerful inputs from climbing fibers occur less
frequently (~1 spike/sec); thus, they have a minor influence on the overall firing rate of the Purkinje cell. The Purkinje cell spikes
that are generated by climbing fibers are calcium-spikes, however, which allow the climbing fibers to initiate a number of calcium-
dependent changes in the Purkinje cell. As described below, one important change appears to be a long-lasting change in the
strength of the parallel-fiber inputs to the Purkinje cell.
5.5 Damage to Cerebellum Produces Movement Disorders
Much of what is known about cerebellar function comes from studies of patients with cerebellar damage. In general, such patients
display uncoordinated voluntary movements and problems maintaining balance and posture. The following are some symptoms of
cerebellar damage (we will discuss more symptoms in the next chapter):
1. Decomposition of movement. Most of our movements involve the coordinated activity of many muscle groups and different
joints to produce a smooth trajectory of the body part through space. Patients with cerebellar dysfunction are unable to
produce these coordinated, smooth movements. Instead, they often break the movements down into their component parts in
order to execute the desired trajectory. For example, touching one’s finger to one’s nose requires the coordinated activity of
shoulder, elbow, and wrist joints. Cerebellar patients must first perform the shoulder movement, then the elbow movement,
and finally the wrist movement in sequence, rather than as one, uniform motion.
2. Intention tremor. When making a movement to a target, cerebellar patients often produce an involuntary tremor that
increases as they approach closer to the target. For example, if reaching for a cup, the hand starts out in a direct line toward
the cup; as it gets closer, however, the hand begins to move back and forth as it attempts to make contact with the cup.
3. Dysdiadochokinesia. Patients have difficulty performing rapidly alternating movements, such as hitting a surface rapidly and
repeatedly with the palm and back of the hand.
4. Deficits in motor learning. Experimental studies have demonstrated that cerebellar damage causes deficits in motor
learning in both human patients and experimental animals. One prominent experimental model is the vestibuloocular reflex
(VOR). This reflex allows us to maintain gaze on an object when the head is rotated (Figure 5.8). Vestibular signals detect
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter05.html 5/10

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Cerebellum (Section 3, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobiolog…
the head movement, and send signals through the cerebellum to the eye muscles to precisely counter the head rotation and
maintain a stable center of gaze. The motor commands to the eyes must be calibrated precisely with experience, and this
calibration appears to be the job of the cerebellum. Experiments have been performed in which subjects wore prisms that
magnified the visual image. When the subjects’ heads were moved, the VOR caused the visual image to shift on the retina
rather than remaining stable. Over days, however, the VOR slowly adjusted, such that the proper compensatory eye
movements were made to keep the retinal image stable when the head was rotated. In experimental animals, lesions to the
cerebellum prevent this adjustment of the VOR.
Figure 5.8
Vestibuloocular reflex (VOR) and cerebellar learning. Click
PLAY Monkey's view PLAY to begin demonstration. Under normal conditions,
when a human or animal subject rotates the head back and
forth, the eyes rotate in an equal and opposite direction in
22
4433 order to keep the image stable on the retina. The vestibular
system provides the input regarding the head movement,
and the motor system has to learn the precise output
commands in order to keep the image stable. When
magnifying glasses are placed on the animal, the eyes do
not move fast enough to compensate for the increased
speed of movement of the magnified image, and thus the
image moves along the retina (termed “retinal slip”) in the
direction opposite to the movement of the head. Over time,
however, the motor system learns to move the eyes faster
(e.g., the gain of the eye movement command is increased),
and the image becomes stable again. When the goggles are
removed, the eyes now move too quickly, causing retinal
slip in the same direction as head movement. With time, the
system will learn to calibrate the VOR again. Patients and
experimental animals with damage to the
vestibulocerebellum are not able to adapt their VOR to the
c 2000 UTHSCH addition and removal of the goggles, demonstrating the role
of the cerebellum in this form of motor learning.
A second example of cerebellum-dependent motor learning involves the execution of accurate, coordinated movements. Subjects
wore prism goggles that shifted the visual image to the right, and they were asked to then throw balls at a target on the wall.
Because of the prisms, the accuracy of the subjects was initially quite low, as the balls consistently hit to the left of the target. With
repeated practice, however, the subjects became more and more accurate at hitting the target. When the goggles were removed,
the subject now began to throw the balls to the right of the target, because their motor programs had been recalibrated to use the
shifted visual input. Over time, once again, they gradually increased their accuracy. Patients with cerebellar damage never learned
to compensate for the prism, as their balls always landed to the left of the target when the goggles were worn. When the goggles
were removed, they were immediately accurate at hitting the target, because they never made compensations for the earlier prism
trials.
A third example involves the Pavlovian classical conditioning of the eye blink reflex. In this task, a neutral stimulus (such as a tone)
is paired with a noxious stimulus (such as a puff of air to the eye) that causes a reflexive eye blink. Over time, experimental
animals will learn to close their eye when the tone occurs, in anticipation of the air puff. This learned eyelid closure is remarkably
well-timed to peak at the expected time of the puff. Animals with cerebellar damage do not learn to produce the eyelid closure in
response to the tone.
5.6 Cerebellum and Control Systems
What do the various symptoms of cerebellar damage have in common that reveal the function of the cerebellum? A number of
different theories have been proposed. Recall the discussion in Chapter 1 of the ubiquitous use of sensory information in motor
control. The cerebellum receives extensive sensory input, and it appears to use this input to guide movements in both a feedback
and feedforward control manner.
Feedback control systems
In a feedback controller, a desired output is compared continuously with the actual output, and adjustments are made during the
execution of the movement until the actual movement matches the desired movement. A common example of a feedback control
system is the thermostat in your home (Figure 5.9).
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter05.html 6/10

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Cerebellum (Section 3, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobiolog…
Figure 5.9
A feedback control system, such as the thermostat in your home, is sufficient for slow
movements, such as posture. The myotatic reflex is an example of a feedback control
system in the spinal cord.
The thermostat is set to a desired temperature (e.g., 72°), and a thermometer measures the current temperature in the room. If
the thermostat (the comparator) detects that the room is cooler than the desired temperature, it sends an error signal that turns on
the furnace. If the comparator detects that the room is warmer than the desired setting, its sends an error signal that turns on the
air conditioner.
Feedback control systems can produce very accurate outputs; however, in general they are slow. In order to change the output, the
effector must wait until information is transmitted from the sensor to the comparator and then to the effector. At this point, another
comparison is made, and the process continues. Consider further the thermostat example. If the temperature reads 5° cooler than
desired, the thermostat can instruct the furnace to turn on at a moderate heat. It reads the new room temperature, and, if it is still
too cool, it instructs the furnace to deliver more heat, and so on. Although this will eventually produce an accurate room
temperature at the desired point, it takes a number of cycles to reach that point. One possible solution for quicker results would be
to turn an enormous furnace on full-blast, such that is heats the room very quickly. This solution, however, can generate another
problem. It will tend to cause the system to oscillate if the feedback pathways are slow. For example, assume that the furnace can
heat the room at the rate of 5° per second, but that it takes 2 seconds for the thermometer to adjust to the new temperature, and
for the new error signal to turn the furnace off. In those 2 seconds, the furnace has heated the room up 10°, and now it is too
warm. So the error signal turns on the air conditioner, and it cools the room at 5°/sec. Of course, it also takes 2 sec to receive the
feedback, and by the time it is told to shut off, it has cooled the room by 10°. You can see what happens: the system will be sent
into an endless oscillation of being 5° too hot and 5° too cold. In order for a feedback system to work well, the transmission time of
sensory information through the comparator to the effector must be rapid compared to the time of the action.
Feedback control systems work well only when the sensory feedback about the actual output is fast relative to the actual output. If
the actual output is faster than the sensor’s ability to provide feedback, then the system will tend to oscillate between overshooting
and undershooting the desired output. Thus, a feedback controller is useful for slow movements, like postural adjustments. The role
of the myotatic reflex in posture maintenance is an example of a feedback controller in the spinal cord, and the cerebellum plays a
role in coordinating these postural adjustments. Feedback control is not effective for most of the fast movements we make routinely
(such as an eye movement or reaching out for a cup). For these movements, a feedforward controller is needed.
Feed forward control systems
In a feedforward control system, when a desired output is sent to the controller, the controller evaluates sensory information
about the environment and about the system itself before the output commands are generated. It uses the sensory information to
program the best set of instructions to accomplish the desired output. However, in a pure feedforward system, once the commands
are sent, there is no way to alter them (i.e., there is no feedback loop). The advantage of a feedforward system is that it can
produce the precise set of commands for the effector without needing to constantly check the output and make corrections during
the movement itself. The main disadvantage, however, is that the feedforward controller requires a period of trial-and-error learning
before it can function properly. In most biological systems, it is hard (perhaps impossible) to pre-program all of the possible
sensory conditions that the controller may encounter during the life of the organism. Furthermore, the environment and conditions
under which actions are made are constantly changing, and the feedforward controller must be able to adapt its output commands
to account for these changes.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter05.html 7/10

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Cerebellum (Section 3, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobiolog…
Figure 5.10
A feedforward control system is needed for fast
movements, because a feedback system is too slow.
Let us extend the thermostat example to see how a temperature controller operating as a feedforward system would work to raise
the temperature of a room from 70° to 75°. The controller would use diverse sensory information about the environment before
sending its command to the furnace (Figure 5.10). For example, it would read the current temperature, the current humidity level,
the size of the room, the number of people in the room, and so forth. Based on this information, it would direct the furnace to turn
on for a pre-set period of time, and that’s it. There would be no need to continually compare the current temperature with the
desired setting, as the system has predetermined how long the furnace needs to be working in order to achieve the desired
temperature. How did the controller obtain this information? A feedforward controller requires a large amount of experience in
order to learn the appropriate actions needed for each set of environmental conditions. If on one trial it turns the furnace off too
soon and the room does not reach the desired temperature, it adjusts its programming such that the next time it encounters the
same environmental conditions, it turns the furnace on for a longer period of time. Through many such instances of trial and error
learning, the feedforward system creates a “look-up table” that tells it how long the furnace needs to be active under the current
conditions. The key distinction between a feedback and feedforward system is that the feedback system uses sensory information
to generate an error signal during the control of a movement, whereas a feedforward system uses sensory information in advance
of a movement. Any error signal about the final output is used by the feedforward system only to change its programming of future
movements.
The cerebellum may be a feedforward control system
The cerebellar involvement in the VOR may be explained in terms of the learning requirements of a feedforward controller. When
the head moves, a compensatory eye movement must be made to maintain a stable gaze. The cerebellum receives sensory input
from the vestibular system informing it that the head is moving. It also receives input from eye muscle proprioceptors and other
relevant sources of information about current conditions in order to make an accurate compensatory eye movement. It evaluates all
of this advance sensory information and calculates the proper eye movement to exactly counterbalance the head movement. What
if the eye movement does not match the head movement, however, and the visual image moves across the retina (such as in the
experimental condition in which a prism was worn, or in a real-life situation in which an individual wears new prescription
eyeglasses)? The retinal slip constitutes an error signal to tell the cerebellum that next time these conditions are met, adjust the
eye movement to decrease the retinal slip. This trial and error sequence will be repeated until the movement is properly calibrated;
moreover, these mechanisms will ensure that the movements stay calibrated.
As another example, the coordination of movements requires that muscle groups be activated in precise temporal sequence. Not
only do the different joints need to be coordinated temporally, but even antagonist muscles that control the same joint need precise
temporal coordination. For example, an extensor muscle needs to be activated to start a reaching movement, and the
corresponding flexor muscle needs to be activated at the end of the movement to stop the movement appropriately. The precise
timing of muscle contractions and the force necessary for each contraction varies with the amount of load placed on a muscle, as
well as on the inherent properties of the muscle itself (e.g., elasticity). These variables are constantly changing throughout life, as
one grows, gains/loses weights, and ages. Moreover, a similar movement will require different patterns of motor activity depending
on the weight being born by the muscle (for example, if an extended hand is empty or holding a heavy weight). The cerebellum
appears necessary for the proper timing and coordination of muscle groups, very likely through a trial-and-error learning
mechanism discussed previously. Such a role helps explain the deficits seen in dysdiadochokinesia, in which patients cannot
perform rapidly alternating sequences of movements.
It is believed that the mossy fiber inputs to the cerebellum convey the sensory information used to evaluate the overall sensory
context of the movement. Mossy fibers are known to respond to sensory stimuli; they are also correlated with different movements
(Figure 5.11). These fibers convey such information as: Where are the appropriate body parts (proprioceptors), what is the current
load on the muscle (proprioceptors, somatosensory receptors, etc.), what other sensory information can predict a useful response
(e.g., the tone in the eye blink conditioning), what are the desired movements (motor cortex). The error signal is believed to be
conveyed by the climbing fiber inputs. Climbing fibers are known to be especially active when an unexpected event occurs, such
as when a greater load than expected is placed on a muscle or when a toe is stubbed. Thus, the large divergence of input from the
mossy fibers to the granule cells to the parallel fibers is believed to create complex representations of the entire sensory context at
present and the desired motor output. When the desired output is not achieved, the climbing fibers signal this error and trigger a
calcium spike in the Purkinje cell. The influx of calcium changes the connection strengths between parallel fibers and Purkinje cells,
such that the next time the same behavioral context occurs, the motor output will be modified to more closely approximate the
desired output.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter05.html 8/10

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Cerebellum (Section 3, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobiolog…
FFFeeeeeedddfffooorrrwwwaaarrrddd cccooonnntttrrrooolll sssyyysssttteeemmm
PAUSE
Climbing Fibers
(Error signal)
UNPAUSE
D MEOSTIROERD Mossy Fibers AADDVVAANNCCEE
OCOUTRPTUEXT SSEENNSSOORR IINNFFOORRMMAATTIIOONN
Mossy
Fibers FEEDFORWARD
CEREBELLUM
CONTROLLER
FFeeeeddffoorrwwaarrdd
ccoonnttrrooll ssiiggnnaall
The cerebellum may act as a
EEFFFFEECCTTOORR OOUUTTPPUUTT c 2000 UTHSCH feedback control system for
slow movements and a
Figure 5.11 feedforward controller for
fast movements. In its
function as a feedforward
controller, the mossy fibers
may provide information
c 2000 UTHSCH regarding the desired output
from motor cortex and the
advance sensory
information about the state
of the worlds and the body.
Cerebellar cortex
Purkinje cell The climbing fibers may
convey information about
movement errors, which
Molecular
Parallel fiber provides a teaching signal
layer
such that the cerebellum is
Granule more likely to produce the
PAUSE cell layer
correct movement the next
Inhibitory time the output is desired.
UNPAUSE synapse
DMeossirseyd f iobuetrpsut;
Cerebellum a(fdrvoamn cmeu slteipnlseo sryources) Cerebellar
deep nuclei
input information
Climbing fibers
error signal
(from inferior olive)
Cerebellum output
Figure 5.12
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
The spinocerebellum contains the...
A. vermis and intermediate zone of the anterior and posterior lobes.
B. Vermal and floccular parts of the flocculonodular lobe.
C. Lateral portions of the cerebellum.
D. Posterior lobe and interposed nuclei.
E. Anterior lobe and dentate nuclei.
Question 2 A B C D E
The lateral vestibular nuclei are functionally analogous to the...
A. Red nucleus
B. Purkinje cells
C. Basal ganglia
D. Thalamus
E. Deep cerebellar nuclei
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter05.html 9/10

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Cerebellum (Section 3, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobiolog…
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter05.html 10/10



1/7/25, 10:07 AM Basal Ganglia (Section 3, Chapter 4) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobiol…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 3: Motor Systems
Search
Chapter 4: Basal Ganglia
James Knierim, Ph.D., Department of Neuroscience, The Johns Hopkins University
Last Review 20 Oct 2020
4.1 Introduction
The previous three chapters have described the anatomy and function of the four levels of the motor system hierarchy: the spinal
cord, the brainstem, the motor cortex, and the association cortex. Two other brain structures can be considered as “side loops” in
the motor hierarchy. They influence the processing of motor control and modulate the output of the descending pathways without
directly causing motor output. Both of these structures—the basal ganglia and the cerebellum—are now known to have other
functions in addition to modulating motor control. Because the most obvious clinical signs of damage to these areas are a wide
variety of motor impairments, they are still generally considered to be motor structures. Basal ganglia dysfunction causes a set of
symptoms that are quite different from damage to descending motor pathways, and thus the basal ganglia were at one time
considered to form an “extrapyramidal motor system” that was distinct from the pyramidal tract pathways. It is now known that the
basal ganglia do not originate a separate motor pathway. Instead, they influence and modulate the activity of motor cortex and the
descending motor pathways in ways that cause distinct symptoms when different basal ganglia structures are damaged.
4.2 Gross Anatomy of the Basal Ganglia
The basal ganglia comprise a distributed set of brain structures in the telencephalon, diencephalon, and mesencephalon (Figure
4.1 and Table 1). The forebrain structures include the caudate nucleus, the putamen, the nucleus accumbens (or ventral
striatum) and the globus pallidus. Together, these structures are named the corpus striatum. The caudate nucleus is a C-shaped
structure that is closely associated with the lateral wall of the lateral ventricle. It is largest at its anterior pole (the head), and its
size diminishes posteriorly as it follows the course of the lateral ventricle (the body) all the way to the temporal lobe (the tail),
where it terminates at the amygdaloid nuclei. The putamen is also a large structure that is separated from the caudate nucleus by
the anterior limb of the internal capsule. The putamen is connected to the caudate head by bridges of cells that cut across the
internal capsule. Because of the striated appearance of these cell bridges (Figure 4.1B), the caudate and putamen are collectively
referred to as the striatum or neostriatum, and the nucleus accumbens is often called the ventral striatum. Functionally, the
caudate nucleus and the putamen are considered equivalent to each other; indeed, most mammals have only a single nucleus
called the striatum. It is unclear whether there is any functional significance of the separation of the striatum into the caudate and
putamen in primates. The putamen and the globus pallidus are collectively called the lenticular nucleus, or lentiform nucleus.
The globus pallidus is divided into two segments: the internal (or medial) segment and the external (or lateral) segment.
Figure 4.1
Basal ganglia structures. (A) Location of basal ganglia components in idealized brain section. (B) Cell
bridges between the caudate and putamen give a striated appearance.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter04.html 1/9

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Basal Ganglia (Section 3, Chapter 4) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobiol…
Table I
Basal Ganglia Nomenclature
The subthalamic nucleus is part of the diencephalon; as its name implies, it is located just below the thalamus. The substantia
nigra is a midbrain structure, composed of two distinct parts: the pars compacta and the pars reticulata. The substantia nigra is
located between the red nucleus and the crus cerebri (cerebral peduncle) on the ventral part of the midbrain. The pars compacta is
the source of a clinically important dopaminergic pathway to the striatum; loss of neurons in this area is the cause of Parkinson’s
disease (see below). An area that is functionally analogous to the substantia nigra pars compacta is the ventral tegmental area,
which is located nearby and makes a dopaminergic projection to the nucleus accumbens.
Historically, the amygdaloid complex and the claustrum were considered parts of the basal ganglia. However, modern usage usually
restricts the term to those structures that cause the motor impairments characteristic of the extrapyramidal syndrome (caudate
nucleus, putamen, globus pallidus, subthalamic nucleus, and substantia nigra).
4.3 Basal Ganglia Afferents
Figure 4.2
Figure 4.2 Basal ganglia afferents. For diagram simplicity, in this and
subsequent figures, the caudate and putamen are represented by the putamen
only, as the two regions have similar connections.
The striatum is the main recipient of afferents to the basal ganglia (Figure 4.2). These excitatory afferents arise from the entire
cerebral cortex and from the intralaminar nuclei of the thalamus (primarily the centromedian nucleus and parafascicularis nucleus).
The projections from different cortical areas are segregated, such that the frontal lobe projects predominantly to the caudate head
and the putamen; the parietal and occipital lobes project to the caudate body; and the temporal lobe projects to the caudate tail.
The primary motor cortex and the primary somatosensory cortex project mainly to the putamen, whereas the premotor cortex and
supplementary motor areas project to the caudate head. Other cortical areas project primarily to the caudate. Thus, along the C-
shaped extent of the caudate nucleus, the caudate cells receive their input from the cortical regions that are close by. The enlarged
head of the caudate reflects the large projection from the frontal cortex to the caudate. In addition, the nucleus accumbens (ventral
striatum) receives a large input from limbic cortex.
In the motor regions of the basal ganglia, there is a motor homunculus similar to that seen in the primary motor cortex. Thus, the
projections from the medial wall of the anterior paracentral lobule (the part of M1 that contains a representation of the legs and
torso) innervate regions of the striatum that are next to the recipient zones from the dorsal surface of the precentral gyrus (the
part of M1 that contains a representation of the arms and hands). Similarly, the projections from the lateral surface of the
precentral gyrus (the part of M1 that contains a representation of the face) innervate regions that are next to the arm and hand
representation. This topography of projections is maintained in the intrinsic circuitry of the basal ganglia.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter04.html 2/9

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Basal Ganglia (Section 3, Chapter 4) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobiol…
4.4 Basal Ganglia Efferents
The major output structures of the basal ganglia are the globus pallidus internal segment (GPint) and the substantia nigra pars
reticulata (SNr) (Figure 4.3). Both of these structures make GABAergic, inhibitory connections on their targets. The GPint projects
to a number of thalamic structures by way of two fiber tracts: the ansa lenticularis and the lenticular fasciculus. The loop that
processes sensorimotor information from the motor cortex and the somatosensory cortex projects to the ventral anterior (VA) and
ventral lateral (VL) nuclei. The loop that processes other neocortical information projects to the dorsomedial nucleus (DM),
intralaminar nuclei, and parts of the VA nucleus. The SNr projects to the superior colliculus, which is involved in eye movements,
as well as to the VA/VL thalamic nuclei.
Figure 4.3
Basal ganglia efferents
4.5 Basal Ganglia Intrinsic Connections
A number of intrinsic pathways interconnect various basal ganglia structures (Figure 4.4).
Figure 4.4
Basal ganglia intrinsic connections
1. The striatopallidal pathway is a GABAergic, inhibitory connection between the striatum and both segments of the globus
pallidus.
2. The striatonigral pathway is a GABAergic, inhibitory connection between the striatum and the SNr.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter04.html 3/9

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Basal Ganglia (Section 3, Chapter 4) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobiol…
3. The globus pallidus external segment makes a GABAergic, inhibitory connection to the subthalamic nucleus.
4. The subthalamic nucleus makes glutamatergic, excitatory connections onto both segments of the globus pallidus and the
SNr. This pathway is the only purely excitatory pathway among the intrinsic pathways of the basal ganglia.
5. The nigrostriatal pathway makes a dopaminergic synapse onto striatal neurons. As we will see below, this is a mixed
pathway, with excitatory effects on some striatal neurons and inhibitory effects on others.
Two pathways process signals in the basal ganglia
There are two distinct pathways that process signals through the basal ganglia: the direct pathway and the indirect pathway. These
two pathways have opposite net effects on thalamic target structures. Excitation of the direct pathway has the net effect of exciting
thalamic neurons (which in turn make excitatory connections onto cortical neurons). Excitation of the indirect pathway has the net
effect of inhibiting thalamic neurons (rendering them unable to excite motor cortex neurons). The normal functioning of the basal
ganglia apparently involves a proper balance between the activity of these two pathways. One hypothesis is that the direct
pathway selectively facilitates certain motor (or cognitive) programs in the cerebral cortex that are adaptive for the present task,
whereas the indirect pathway simultaneously inhibits the execution of competing motor programs. An upset of the balance
between the direct and indirect pathways results in the motor dysfunctions that characterize the extrapyramidal syndrome (see
below).
Direct pathway. Although the connectivity patterns of the direct and indirect pathways are relatively straightforward, the
predominance of inhibitory connections in the system can make an understanding of the functional circuitry complicated and non-
intuitive (Figure 4.5).
Indirect
pathway From DIRECT PATHWAY
To cerebral
cerebral cortex INDIRECT PATHWAY
cortex
NIGROSTRIATAL PATHWAY
SHOW ALL
Direct
Nigrostriatal pathway
pathway
Thalamus
Subthalamic
nucleus
Substantia nigra
(pars compacta) Globus pallidus Globus pallidus Striatum
internal segment external segment (Caudate
c 2000 UTHSCH +Putamen)
Figure 4.5
Direct/indirect pathways. Solid lines represent direct pathway and dashed lines represent
indirect pathway. (The output from GPi is common to both pathways.) Green lines represent
excitatory connections and red lines represent inhibitory connections. Click on individual pathway
names to view each pathway in isolation.
The direct pathway starts with cells in the striatum that make inhibitory connections with cells in the GPint. The GPint cells in turn
make inhibitory connections on cells in the thalamus. Thus, the firing of GPint neurons inhibits the thalamus, making the thalamus
less likely to excite the neocortex. When the direct pathway striatal neurons fire, however, they inhibit the activity of the GPint
neurons. This inhibition releases the thalamic neurons from inhibition (i.e., it disinhibits the thalamic neurons), allowing them to fire
to excite the cortex. Thus, because of the “double negative” in the pathway between the striatum and GPint and the GPint and
thalamus, the net result of exciting the direct pathway striatal neurons is to excite motor cortex.
Think of it as a multiplication equation, with an excitatory connection (E) equal to +1 and an inhibitory connection (I) equal to –1:
Because the two negative numbers cancel each other out.
Indirect pathway. The indirect pathway starts with a different set of cells in the striatum. These neurons make inhibitory
connections to the external segment of the globus pallidus (GPext). The GPext neurons make inhibitory connections to cells in the
subthalamic nucleus, which in turn make excitatory connections to cells in the GPint. (Remember that the subthalamic-GPint
pathway is the only purely excitatory pathway within the intrinsic basal ganglia circuitry.) As we saw before, the GPint neurons
make inhibitory connections on the thalamic neurons. To see the net effects of activation of the indirect pathway, let us work
backwards from the GPint. When the GPint cells are active, they inhibit thalamic neurons, thus making cortex less active. When the
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter04.html 4/9

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Basal Ganglia (Section 3, Chapter 4) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobiol…
subthalamic neurons are firing, they increase the firing rate of GPint neurons, thus increasing the net inhibition on cortex. Firing of
the GPext neurons inhibits the subthalamic neurons, thus making the GPint neurons less active and disinhibiting the thalamus.
However, when the indirect pathway striatal neurons are active, they inhibit the GPext neurons, thus disinhibiting the subthalamic
neurons. With the subthalamic neurons free to fire, the GPint neurons inhibit the thalamus, thereby producing a net inhibition on
the motor cortex.
Again, think of a multiplication analogy:
Because there are 3 negative numbers in the equation, the net effect is negative.
Thus, as a result of the complex sequences of excitation, inhibition, and disinhibition, the net effect of the cortex exciting the direct
pathway is to further excite the cortex (positive feedback loop), whereas the net effect of cortex exciting the indirect pathway is
to inhibit the cortex (negative feedback loop). Presumably, the function of the basal ganglia is related to a proper balance between
these two pathways. Motor cortex neurons have to excite the proper direct pathway neurons to further increase their own firing,
and they have to excite the proper indirect pathways neurons that will inhibit other motor cortex neurons that are not adaptive for
the task at hand (see below).
The nigrostriatal projection
An important pathway in the modulation of the direct and indirect pathways is the dopaminergic, nigrostriatal projection from
the substantia nigra pars compacta to the striatum (Figure 4.5). Direct pathway striatal neurons have D1 dopamine receptors,
which depolarize the cell in response to dopamine. In contrast, indirect pathway striatal neurons have D2 dopamine receptors,
which hyperpolarize the cell in response to dopamine. The nigrostriatal pathway thus has the dual effect of exciting the direct
pathway while simultaneously inhibiting the indirect pathway. Because of this dual effect, excitation of the nigrostriatal pathway has
the net effect of exciting cortex by two routes, by exciting the direct pathway (which itself has a net excitatory effect on cortex) and
inhibiting the indirect pathway (thereby disinhibiting the net inhibitory effect of the indirect pathway on cortex). The loss of these
dopamine neurons in Parkinson’s disease causes the poverty of movement that characterizes this disease, as the balance between
direct pathway excitation of cortex and indirect pathway inhibition of cortex is tipped in favor of the indirect pathway, with a
subsequent pathological global inhibition of motor cortex areas.
4.6 Functions of the Basal Ganglia
Motor functions
The function of the basal ganglia in motor control is not understood in detail. It appears that the basal ganglia is involved in the
enabling of practiced motor acts and in gating the initiation of voluntary movements by modulating motor programs stored in the
motor cortex and elsewhere in the motor hierarchy (Figure 4.6). Thus, voluntary movements are not initiated in the basal ganglia
(they are initiated in the cortex); however, proper functioning of the basal ganglia appears to be necessary in order for the motor
cortex to relay the appropriate motor commands to the lower levels of the hierarchy.
Figure 4.6
The basal ganglia and motor cortex form a processing loop whereby
the basal ganglia enables the proper motor program stored in motor
cortex circuits via the direct pathway and inhibits competing motor
programs via the indirect pathway. The proper motor programs are
selected based on the desired motor output relayed from cortex.
Note that the complex circuits of the direct and indirect pathways
are schematically diagramed as single neurons for clarity of
illustration.
Recall that the major output from the basal ganglia is an inhibitory connection from the GPint (or SNr) to the thalamus (or superior
colliculus). Studies of eye movements in monkeys have shed light on the function of the basal ganglia loop. Normally, the SNr
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter04.html 5/9

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Basal Ganglia (Section 3, Chapter 4) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobiol…
neurons are tonically active, suppressing the output of the collicular neurons that control saccadic eye movements. When the direct
pathway striatal neurons are excited by the cortical frontal eye fields, the SNr neurons are momentarily inhibited, releasing the
collicular neurons from inhibition. This allows the appropriate collicular neurons to signal the target of the eye movement, allowing
the monkey to change its gaze to a new location. The movement was initiated in the frontal eye fields; however, the proper
activation of the eye movement required that collicular neurons be released from the inhibition of the basal ganglia.
What is the function of the tonic inhibitory output of the basal ganglia? Recall from the Motor Cortex chapter that stimulating the
motor cortex of monkeys at various locations results in stereotyped sequences of movements, such as bringing the hand to the
mouth or adopting a defensive posture. It appears that a number of “primitive” motor programs are stored in the cortex, and motor
control may require the activation of these elemental motor programs in the precise temporal order to accomplish a sophisticated
motor plan. It is important that only one motor program be active at a given time, however, such that one motor act (e.g., use
hand to bring food to the mouth) is not competing with a conflicting motor act (e.g., use hand to shield face from dangerous
object). It is thought that the basal ganglia is normally active in suppressing inappropriate motor programs, and that activation of
the direct pathway temporarily releases one motor program from inhibition, enabling it to be executed by the organism. Thus, the
basal ganglia act as a gate that enables the execution of automatic programs in the hierarchy.
Figure 4.7
Dopaminergic neurons signal unexpected reward or unexpected absence of reward
(Hollerman and Schultz, 1998). (A) If a reward occurs unexpectedly, the
dopaminergic neuron fires briskly. This may strengthen the cortical motor programs
that led up to the reward. (B) If a reward occurs that the monkey previously
learned was predicted by a stimulus, the neuronal firing is not altered, thus
signaling that all is proceeding normally. (C) If the reward-predicting stimulus does
not produce a reward, the neuronal firing is inhibited. This inhibition may weaken
the cortical motor programs that did not produce the expected reward.
Which motor programs should be released from inhibition at a given moment? The basal ganglia may have a major role in learning
what motor acts result in rewards for the organism. This information is provided by the dopaminergic neurons of the SNc and
ventral tegmental nucleus. Recordings from these neurons in monkeys have shown that they tend to respond when the monkey
receives an unexpected reward, and they tend to be inhibited when the monkey fails to receive an expected reward (Figure 4.7).
Because the net effect of activation of the nigrostriatal pathway is to excite the direct pathway and inhibit the indirect
pathway, this pattern of dopaminergic firing may be involved in tuning the relative balance of direct/indirect pathway activity to
enhance the firing of cortical motor programs that produce rewarding outcomes and to suppress the activity of motor programs that
do not result in reward. In this way, motor habits can be constructed that tend to reward the animal.
Cognitive functions
As mentioned earlier, there are a number of cortical loops through the basal ganglia that involve prefrontal association cortex and
limbic cortex. Through these loops, the basal ganglia are thought to play a role in cognitive function that is similar to their role in
motor control. That is, the basal ganglia are involved in selecting and enabling various cognitive, executive, or emotional programs
that are stored in these other cortical areas. Moreover, the basal ganglia appear to be involved in certain types of learning. For
example, in rodents the striatum is necessary for the animal to learn certain stimulus-response tasks (e.g., make a right turn if
stimulus A is present and make a left turn if stimulus B is present). Recordings from rat striatal neurons show that early in training,
striatal neurons fire at many locations while a rat learns such a task on a T-shaped maze (Figure 4.8). This suggests that initially
the striatum is involved throughout the execution of the task. As the animal learns the task and becomes exceedingly good at its
performance, the striatal neurons change their activity patterns, firing only at the beginning of the trial and at the end. It appears
that the learned programs to solve this task are now stored elsewhere; the firing of the striatal neurons at the beginning of the
maze presumably reflects the enabling of the appropriate motor/cognitive plan in the cortex, and the firing at the end of the maze
is presumably involved in evaluating the reward outcome of the trial.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter04.html 6/9

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Basal Ganglia (Section 3, Chapter 4) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobiol…
Figure 4.8
Habit learning in striatum (Jog et al., 1999). (A) A rat is trained to run down a T-shaped maze and make a left
turn for food reward if it hears a high-pitch tone or make a right turn for food reward if it hears a low-pitch tone.
(B) Early in training, as the rat is beginning to learn the task, striatal neurons fire at locations all over the maze,
especially at the choice point. (C) Late in training, when the rat has mastered the task and performs very quickly
and accurately, the striatal neurons now fire only at the start and ends of the maze.
In humans, the basal ganglia appear to be necessary for certain forms of implicit memory tasks. Like motor habit learning
discussed above, many types of cognitive learning require repeated trials and are often unconscious. An example is probabilistic
classification (Figure 4.9). In this type of task, people have to learn to classify objects based on the probability of belonging to a
class, rather than on any explicit rule. In one experiment, subjects were shown a deck of cards with different symbols. Each symbol
was associated with a certain probability of predicting rain or sunshine, and the subjects had to say on each trial whether the
symbol was a predictor of rain or sunshine. Because the same symbol sometimes predicted sunshine and other times predicted
rain, the subjects could not devise a simple rule, and they made many errors at first. Over time, however, they began to get better
at classifying the symbols appropriately, although they still often claimed to be guessing. Patients with basal ganglia disorders were
impaired at this task, suggesting that the processing of the cognitive loops of the basal ganglia are somehow involved in our ability
to subconsciously learn the probabilities of predicted outcomes associated with particular stimuli.
Figure 4.9
Patients with basal ganglia disorders are impaired in learning this implicit probabilistic
classification task in which they have to predict the weather based on a set of 4 cue cards (Packard
and Knowlton, 2002).
4.7 Disorders of the Basal Ganglia
A number of neurological disorders result from damage to the basal ganglia. Two of these disorders (Parkinson’s disease and
Huntington’s disease) will be briefly discussed here to relate the concepts learned in this chapter to the symptoms of the disorders.
More thorough treatment of these disorders will be given in the chapter on Disorders of the Nervous System.
Nigrostriatal pathway and Parkinson’s disease
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter04.html 7/9

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Basal Ganglia (Section 3, Chapter 4) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobiol…
Indirect
pathway From PARKINSON'S DISEASE
To cerebral
cerebral cortex HUNTINGTON'S DISEASE
cortex
RESET
Direct
Nigrostriatal pathway
pathway
Thalamus
Subthalamic
nucleus
Substantia nigra
(pars compacta) Globus pallidus Globus pallidus Striatum
internal segment external segment (Caudate
c 2000 UTHSCH +Putamen)
Figure 4.10
Parkinson’s disease and Huntington’s disease. Click on disease names to see neural damage that
produces the disorders.
Parkinson’s disease is characterized by slowness or absence of movement (bradykinesia or akinesia), rigidity, and a resting
tremor (especially in the hands and fingers). Patients have difficulty initiating movements, and once initiated the movements are
abnormally slow. The cause of Parkinson’s disease is the loss of the dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars
compacta (Figure 4.10). From one’s knowledge of the effects of the nigrostriatal pathway on the direct and indirect pathways, it
becomes straightforward to see why the loss of this pathway results in the poverty of movement symptomatic of Parkinson’s
disease. Because the nigrostriatal pathway excites the direct pathway and inhibits the indirect pathway, the loss of this input tips
the balance in favor of activity in the indirect pathway. Thus, the GPint neurons are abnormally active, keeping the thalamic
neurons inhibited. Without the thalamic input, the motor cortex neurons are not as excited, and therefore the motor system is less
able to execute the motor plans in response to the patient’s volition.
Indirect pathway and Huntington’s disease
The symptoms of Huntington’s disease are in many respects the opposite of the symptoms of Parkinson’s disease. Huntington’s
disease is characterized by choreiform movements: involuntary, continuous movement of the body, especially of the extremities
and face. Often these movements resemble pieces of adaptive movements, but they occur involuntarily and without behavioral
significance. Huntington’s disease results from the selective loss of striatal neurons in the indirect pathway (Figure 4.10). Thus, the
balance between the direct and indirect pathways becomes tipped in favor of the direct pathway. Without the normal inhibitory
influence on the thalamus that is provided by the indirect pathway, thalamic neurons can fire randomly and inappropriately, causing
the motor cortex to execute motor programs with no control by the patient.
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
Which of the basal ganglia nuclei receive direct cortical input?
A. Claustrum and amygdala. This answer is INCORRECT.
The claustrum and amygdale are not components of the basal ganglia.
B. Centromedian nucleus and subthalamic nucleus.
C. Substantia nigra pars compacta and globus pallidus external.
D. Globus pallidus internal and substantia nigra pars reticulata.
E. Caudate and putamen.
Question 2 A B C D E
All of the following statements about the basal ganglia are correct EXCEPT:
A. The net effect of excitation of the direct pathway is to inhibit cortex.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter04.html 8/9

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Basal Ganglia (Section 3, Chapter 4) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobiol…
B. Dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra signal unexpected reward or unexpected
absence of reward.
C. The basal ganglia have both motor and cognitive functions.
D. The subthalamic nucleus is the origin of the only purely excitatory pathway within the
basal ganglia intrinsic circuitry.
E. Parkinson's disease results from damage to the basal ganglia.
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter04.html 9/9



1/7/25, 10:07 AM Motor Cortex (Section 3, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobiol…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 3: Motor Systems
Search
Chapter 3: Motor Cortex
James Knierim, Ph.D., Department of Neuroscience, The Johns Hopkins University
Last Review 20 Oct 2020
3.1 Introduction
The previous chapters discussed the lower levels of the motor hierarchy (the spinal cord and brainstem), which are involved in the
low-level, “nuts and bolts” processing that controls the activity of individual muscles. Individual alpha motor neurons control the
force exerted by a particular muscle, and spinal circuits can control sophisticated and complex behaviors such as walking and reflex
actions. The types of movements controlled by these circuits are not initiated consciously, however. Voluntary movements require
the participation of the third and fourth levels of the hierarchy: the motor cortex and the association cortex. These areas of the
cerebral cortex plan voluntary actions, coordinate sequences of movements, make decisions about proper behavioral strategies and
choices, evaluate the appropriateness of a particular action given the current behavioral or environmental context, and relay
commands to the appropriate sets of lower motor neurons to execute the desired actions.
3.2 Motor Cortex Comprises the Primary Motor Cortex, Premotor Cortex, and Supplementary
Motor Area
c 2000 UTHSCH
Primary motor cortex
Premotor cortex
Supplemental motor area
Figure 3.1
Motor cortex areas (lateral, dorsal, and medial
views). The primary motor cortex is located
immediately anterior to the central sulcus.
Select from the boxes in the center to see larger
views.
The motor cortex comprises three different areas of the frontal lobe, immediately anterior to the central sulcus. These areas are
the primary motor cortex (Brodmann’s area 4), the premotor cortex, and the supplementary motor area (Figure 3.1).
Electrical stimulation of these areas elicits movements of particular body parts. The primary motor cortex, or M1, is located on the
precentral gyrus and on the anterior paracentral lobule on the medial surface of the brain. Of the three motor cortex areas,
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter03.html 1/10

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Motor Cortex (Section 3, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobiol…
stimulation of the primary motor cortex requires the least amount of electrical current to elicit a movement. Low levels of brief
stimulation typically elicit simple movements of individual body parts. Stimulation of premotor cortex or the supplementary motor
area requires higher levels of current to elicit movements, and often results in more complex movements than stimulation of
primary motor cortex. Stimulation for longer time periods (500 msec) in monkeys results in the movement of a particular body part
to a stereotyped posture or position, regardless of the initial starting point of the body part (Figure 3.2). Thus, the premotor cortex
and supplementary motor areas appear to be higher level areas that encode complex patterns of motor output and that select
appropriate motor plans to achieve desired end results.
c 2000 UTHSCH STIMULATE 1
STIMULATE 2
Figure 3.2
Electrical stimulation of premotor cortex of a monkey for 500 msec produces movement to stereotyped postures
depending on the location of the stimulating electrode. Stimulation of site one (click STIMULATE 1) causes the monkey to
bring its arm in front of its eyes, regardless of the starting location of the arm, as if the monkey were producing a
defensive posture. Stimulation of site two (click STIMULATE 2) causes the monkey to bring its arm to its mouth and open
the mouth, regardless of the starting location of the arm, as if it were bringing a piece of food to its mouth (Graziano et
al., 2002).
Like the somatosensory cortex of the postcentral gyrus, the primary motor cortex is somatotopically organized (Figure 3.3).
Stimulation of the anterior paracentral lobule elicits movements of the contralateral leg. As the stimulating electrode is moved
across the precentral gyrus from dorsomedial to ventrolateral, movements are elicited progressively from the torso, arm, hand, and
face (most laterally). The representations of body parts that perform precise, delicate movements, such as the hands and face, are
disproportionately large compared to the representations of body parts that perform only coarse, unrefined movements, such as
the trunk or legs. The premotor cortex and supplementary motor area also contain somatotopic maps.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter03.html 2/10

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Motor Cortex (Section 3, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobiol…
Figure 3.3
Somatotopic representation of motor outputs in motor
cortex.
One might predict that the motor cortex “homunculus” arises because neurons that control individual muscles are clustered
together in the cortex. That is, all of the neurons that control the biceps muscle may be located together, and all of the neurons
that control the triceps may be clustered nearby, and the neurons that control the soleus muscle may be clustered in a region
further removed. Electrophysiological recordings have shown that this is not the case, however. Movements of individual muscles
are correlated with activity from widespread parts of the primary motor cortex. Similarly, stimulation of small regions of primary
motor cortex elicits movements that require the activity of numerous muscles. Thus, the primary motor cortex homunculus does
not represent the activity of individual muscles. Rather, it apparently represents the movements of individual body parts, which
often require the coordinated activity of large groups of muscles throughout the body.
3.3 Cortical Afferents and Efferents
The motor cortex exerts its influence over muscles by a variety of descending routes (Figure 3.4). Some of the descending
pathways reviewed in the last chapter can be influenced by motor cortex output. Thus, in addition to the direct cortical innervation
of alpha motor neurons via the corticospinal tract, the following cortical efferent pathways influence the remaining descending
tracts:
1. the corticorubral tract allows cortex to modulate the rubrospinal tract
2. the corticotectal tract allows cortex to modulate the tectospinal tract
3. the corticoreticular tract allows cortex to modulate the reticulospinal tracts
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 3.4
Parallel pathways from the motor cortex allow the
cortical motor areas to influence the processing of all
descending motor tracts and side loops of the motor
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter03.html 3/10

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Motor Cortex (Section 3, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobiol…
system.
Mouse over the pathways for more information.
The cortex can also influence the processing of the side loops of the motor hierarchy. The corticostriate tract innervates the caudate
nucleus and putamen of the basal ganglia. The corticopontine tract and cortico-olivary tract innervate important inputs to the
cerebellum. Finally, cortical areas can influence other cortical areas, directly via corticocortical pathways and indirectly via the
corticothalamic pathways (Figure 3.5). Most of these pathways are bi-directional. Thus, motor cortex receives input from other
cortical areas, directly and indirectly through the thalamus, and it receives input from the cerebellum and basal ganglia, always
through the thalamus.
Posterior parietal cortex Somato
cor
M
SMA c
Premotor
cortex
CM VL VA
Basal
Ce
ganglia
Figure 3.5
Major connections of motor cortex. The cross-section on the left is a schematic
version of an idealized brain section that contains the major structures of the motor
system hierarchy for illustrative purposes; no actual brain section would contain all
of these structures. Move the cursor over each box on the right to highlight the
inputs (blue) and outputs (red) of each region.
3.4 Motor Cortex Cytoarchitecture
Like all parts of the neocortex, the primary motor cortex is made of six layers (Figure 3.6). Unlike primary sensory areas, primary
motor cortex is agranular cortex; that is, it does not have a cell-packed granular layer (layer 4). Instead, the most distinctive layer
of primary motor cortex is its descending output layer (Layer 5), which contains the giant Betz cells. These pyramidal cells and
other projection neurons of the primary motor cortex make up ~30% of the fibers in the corticospinal tract. The rest of the fibers
come from the premotor cortex and the supplementary motor area (~30%), the somatosensory cortex (~30%), and the posterior
parietal cortex (~10%).
Figure 3.6
Pyramidal and non-pyramidal
neurons in motor cortex. The
cerebral cortex is organized
into six layers. These layers
contain different proportions
of the two main classes of
cortical neurons, pyramidal
and non-pyramidal cells.
Pyramidal cells send long
axons down the spinal cord
and are the major output
neurons. They are abundant in
layer 5. Non-pyramidal cells
have axons which terminate
locally.
3.5 Encoding of Movement by Motor Cortex
Primary Motor Cortex
As discussed above, the primary motor cortex does not generally control individual muscles directly, but rather appears to control
individual movements or sequences of movements that require the activity of multiple muscle groups. Alpha motor neurons in the
spinal cord, in turn, encode the force of contraction of groups of muscle fibers using the rate code and the size principle. Thus, in
accordance with the concept of hierarchical organization of the motor system, the information represented by motor cortex is a
higher level of abstraction than the information represented by spinal motor neurons.
What is encoded by the neurons in primary motor cortex? Clues have come from recording the activity of these neurons as
experimental animals perform different motor tasks. In general, primary motor cortex encodes the parameters that define
individual movements or simple movement sequences.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter03.html 4/10

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Motor Cortex (Section 3, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobiol…
1. Primary motor cortex neurons fire 5-100 msec before the onset of a movement. Thus, rather than firing as the result
of muscle activity, these neurons are involved in relaying motor commands to the alpha motor neurons that eventually cause
the appropriate muscles to contract.
2. Primary motor cortex encodes the force of a movement. The amount of force required to raise the arm from one
location to another is much greater if one is holding a bowling ball than if one is holding a balloon. Many neurons in primary
motor cortex encode the amount of force that is necessary to make such a movement (Figure 3.7). Note the distinction
between movement force and muscle force. Whereas a minority of primary motor cortex neurons encodes individual muscle
force, a larger number encodes the amount of force necessary for a particular movement, regardless of which individual
muscles are used. Alpha motor neurons, in turn, translate the commands of the motor cortex neurons and control the amount
of force generated by individual muscles to accomplish that movement, under the principles of the rate code and the size
principle.
Figures 3.7A, 3.7B, and 3.7C
Motor cortex encodes the force necessary to make a movement. (Evarts 1968)
PLAY
No load Extension motor neuron
Figure 3.7A. When there is little load,
a motor neuron in primary motor
cortex that controls an extension of
the wrist fires when the wrist
Flexion motor neuron extends. A motor neuron that controls
wrist flexion does not change its low
rate of activity. Note that the
extension motor neuron begins to fire
spikes before the onset of the
(electrode in movement.
primary text goes here
motor cortex)
c 2000 UTHSCH
PLAY
Extensor load Extension motor neuron
Figure 3.7B. When a 5 lb. load is
placed on the left pulley, more force
must be used to initially hold the
Flexion motor neuron weight steady and then lift it. The
extension motor neuron in primary
motor cortex fires more strongly to
produce the greater force.
5 text goes here
(electrode in
lbs primary
motor cortex)
c 2000 UTHSCH
PLAY Figure 3.7C. When a 5 lb. load is
Flexor load Extension motor neuron placed on the right pulley, the load is
on the flexor. Thus, primary motor
cortex neurons for flexion are
activated to keep the weight stable.
When the wrist extends, the neurons
are quieter, as the force of the
Flexion motor neuron movement is actually produced by the
weight itself. (Note that motor cortex
encodes the force of a movement,
such as wrist extension or more
complicated, multi-joint movements.
5
(electrode in The force of individual muscles is
lbs primary encoded by alpha motor neurons in
motor cortex)
the spinal cord and brain stem.)
c 2000 UTHSCH text goes here
3. Primary motor cortex encodes the direction of movement. Many neurons in the primary motor cortex are selective for a
particular direction of movement. For example, one cell may fire strongly when the hand is moved to the left, whereas it will
be inhibited when the hand is moved to the right (Figure 3.8).
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter03.html 5/10

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Motor Cortex (Section 3, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobiol…
Click on each c 2000 UTHSCH
directional coordinate
900
1350 450
1800 00
2250 3150
2700
Figure 3.8
Directional tuning of motor cortex neurons.
The cell fires maximally when the hand is
moved in the 135º or 180º directions,
moderately when the hand moves in the 90º
and 225º directions, and is silent when the
hand moves in the opposite directions (0º, 45º,
270º, and 315º) (Georgopoulos et al., 1982).
4. Primary motor cortex encodes the extent of movement. The firing of some neurons is correlated with the distance of a
movement. A monkey was trained to move its arm to different target locations that varied in direction and distance from the
center. The firing of many neurons was correlated with the direction of movement (as in Point 3), whereas the firing of other
neurons was correlated with the distance of the movement. Interestingly, some neurons were correlated with the interaction
of a particular distance and direction; that is, they were correlated with a particular target position.
5. Primary motor cortex neurons encode the speed of movement. Almost all targeted movements follow a typical bell-
shaped curve of velocity as a function of distance (Figure 3.9). For example, when the hand moves an object such as a coffee
cup from one location to another (the target), the hand accelerates during the first half of the movement, reaches a peak
velocity approximately halfway to the target, and then decelerates until it reaches the target. The firing rate of some primary
motor cortex neurons in monkeys correlates with this bell-shaped speed profile, demonstrating that information about
movement speed is contained in the spike trains of these neurons.
PLAY d
e
e
p
s
tn
e
m
e
v
oM
c 2000 UTHSCH start midpoint end
Figure 3.9
Velocity profile of targeted movements.
Premotor Cortex
The premotor cortex sends axons to the primary motor cortex as well as to the spinal cord directly. It performs more complex,
task-related processing than primary motor cortex. Stimulation of premotor areas in the monkey at a high level of current produces
more complex postures than stimulation of the primary motor cortex. The premotor cortex appears to be involved in the selection
of appropriate motor plans for voluntary movements, whereas the primary motor cortex is involved in the execution of these
voluntary movements.
1. Premotor cortex neurons signal the preparation for movement. Monkeys were trained to make a particular movement
in response to a visual signal, with a variable delay between the onset of the signal and the onset of the movement (Figure
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter03.html 6/10

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Motor Cortex (Section 3, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobiol…
3.10). Recordings from premotor cortex have shown that many neurons fire selectively in the delay interval, for many
seconds before the onset of the movement. A particular neuron will fire when the monkey is preparing to make a movement
to the left, for example, but will be silent when the monkey is preparing to make a movement to the right. Thus, the firing of
this type of neuron does not cause the movement itself, but appears to be involved in preparing the monkey to make the
correct movement when the “Go” signal is given. This type of neuron is called a motor-set neuron, as it fires when the
monkey is preparing, or getting set, to make a movement.
c 2000 U
Prepare right cell PLAY
PPLLAAYY
Prepare left cell
Figure 3.10
Premotor cortex neurons signal preparation for movement. A monkey is trained to prepare to
make a movement to the right or left depending on a cue instruction, but to delay the
movement until a “Move” signal is given (Weinrich and Wise 1982). Some neurons will fire
selectively when the animal is preparing to make a movement to the right (Play Prepare right
cell). Other neurons will fire selectively when the animal is preparing to make a movement to
the left (Play Prepare left cell). Note that the cells fire in the interval between the Prepare
instruction and the Move instruction, but they do not fire during the movement itself.
2. Premotor cortex neurons signal various sensory aspects associated with particular motor acts. Some premotor
neurons fire when the animal is performing a particular action, such as breaking a peanut (Figure 3.11). Interestingly, the
same neuron fires selectively when the animal sees another monkey or person breaking the peanut. It also fires selectively to
the sound of a peanut shell being broke, even without any visual or motor activity. These neurons are called “mirror”
neurons, because they respond not only to a particular action of the monkey but also to the sight (or sound) of another
individual performing the same action. (For an interesting PBS video on mirror neurons, go to
http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/sciencenow/3204/01.html.)
crack
A
Monkey breaking peanut.
crack
B
Monkey watching a person
break a peanut.
crack
C
Monkey hearing sound of
peanut breaking. c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 3.11
Mirror neuron in premotor cortex fires to the monkey’s action as well as the monkey’s perception
of a person performing the same action (Kohler et al., 2002).
3. Premotor cortex is sensitive to the behavioral context of a particular movement. The premotor cortex of human
subjects was imaged with functional MRI as they observed video of a hand grasping a cup (Figure 3.12). In one condition, the
cup was full and surrounded by full plates of food; the implication was that the person was grasping the cup to take a drink.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter03.html 7/10

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Motor Cortex (Section 3, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobiol…
In the other condition, the cup was empty and surrounded by dirty dishes; the implication was that the person was grasping
the cup to clear the table. In this experiment, the premotor cortex was more active when subjects viewed the former video
than the latter, even though the movements were the same. Thus, premotor cortex neurons are sensitive to the inferred
intentions of a movement, not just the movement itself, as deduce from the behavioral context in which the movement
occurred.
PLAY
Grasp cup
to drink
PLAY
Grasp cup to
clear table
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 3.12
Premotor cortex activity distinguishes the same movement based on the behavioral
context of the movement (Iacoboni et al., 2005). When the subject viewed an arm
moving to pick up a cup to drink (PLAY top), the activity in premotor cortex was
greater than when the subject viewed an arm moving to pick up a cup to clear the
table after a meal (PLAY bottom). Note that the strength of activity in the cortex
(denoted by the brightness of the activated cortical region) is greater in the top than in
the bottom animations.
4. Premotor cortex signals correct and incorrect actions. Human subjects were studied in an fMRI experiment as they
observed video clips of various correct and incorrect motor acts. A correct action was one in which the movement and the
associated object was performed correctly, such as setting the time on a clock. An object error was one in which the action
was correct, but the object was incorrect, such as polishing a brown shoe with black shoe polish. A movement error was one
in which the object was correct, but the movement was incorrect, such as attempting to put a coin into a piggy bank when the
coin was oriented perpendicular to the coin slot. In this experiment, the premotor cortex was activated bilaterally during the
correct actions trials and the movement error trials; for the object error trials, only the premotor cortex of the left hemisphere
was activated preferentially.
Supplementary Motor Area
The supplementary motor area (SMA) is involved in programming complex sequences of movements and coordinating bilateral
movements. Whereas the premotor cortex appears to be involved in selecting motor programs based on visual stimuli or on
abstract associations, the supplementary motor area appears to be involved in selecting movements based on remembered
sequences of movements.
1. SMA responds to sequences of movements and to mental rehearsal of sequences of movements (Figure 3.13).
Brain activity was measured in a PET scanner while subjects made simple and complex sequences of movement. When the
movements were simple, such as a repetitive movement of a single digit, the primary motor cortex and the primary
somatosensory cortex were activated on the contralateral hemisphere. When the subject was asked to perform a complex
sequence of finger movements, the SMA was activated bilaterally, in addition to the contralateral primary motor and
somatosensory cortex activation. Finally, when the subject was asked to remain still but to mentally rehearse the complex
sequence of activity, the SMA was still active, even though the primary motor and somatosensory cortex areas were silent.
Thus, the SMA appears to be involved in bilateral movements and in the mental rehearsal of these movements.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter03.html 8/10

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Motor Cortex (Section 3, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobiol…
Left hemisphere Right hemisphere Left hand Right hand
PLAY M1 and S1
Simple
movement
PLAY SMA M1 and S1 SMA
Complex
movement
PLAY SMA SMA
Imaginary
complex
movement
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 3.13
Positron emission tomography (PET) study of simple vs. complex finger movements (Roland et al.,1980). The
SMA is activated bilaterally when subjects perform complex movements, and even when they only imagine
performing the movements.
2. SMA is involved in the transformation of kinematic to dynamic information. Movements can be defined in terms of
dynamics (the amount of force necessary to make a movement) and kinematics (the distance and angles that define a
particular movement in space). Many movement plans are represented in kinematic terms (e.g., Move the hand to the left).
However, the motor system must eventually translate this to a representation based on dynamics, in order to instruct the
appropriate muscles to contract with the appropriate force. Recordings from monkeys have shown that during the preparatory
delay before a monkey makes an instructed movement, some SMA neurons change their firing correlates from a kinematic-
based representation to a dynamics-based representation, suggesting that SMA plays a vital role in this transformation.
Association Cortex
The fourth level of the motor hierarchy is the association cortex, in particular the prefrontal cortex and the posterior parietal
cortex (Figure 3.14). These brain areas are not motor areas in the strict sense. Their activity does not correlate precisely with
individual motor acts, and stimulation of these areas does not result in motor output. However, these areas are necessary to ensure
that movements are adaptive to the needs of the organism and appropriate to the behavioral context.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter03.html 9/10

1/7/25, 10:07 AM Motor Cortex (Section 3, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobiol…
Figure 3.14
Association cortex.
The prefrontal cortex is highlighted on the
left, and the posterior parietal cortex is
highlighted on the right.
1. Posterior parietal cortex is involved in ensuring that movements are targeted accurately to objects in external
space. This area is involved in processing spatial relationships of objects in the world and in constructing a representation of
external space that is independent of the observer’s eye position or body position. Such representations allow a stable percept
of the world that is independent of viewer orientation, as well as the representation of desired trajectories in space that are
independent of body position. Damage to the posterior parietal cortex can result in a number of apraxias, that is, the
inability to make complex, coordinated movements. For example, a patient with constructional apraxia is unable to replicate
the configuration of a set of blocks in the proper sequence, even though the patient is able to maneuver each block
individually with dexterity.
2. Prefrontal cortex is involved in the selection of appropriate actions for a particular behavioral context. It is also
involved in the evaluation of the consequences of a particular course of action. Patients with damage to the prefrontal cortex
have problems in executive processing. They make inappropriate behavioral decisions, and often cannot anticipate the likely
consequences of their actions. They display impulsive behavior, often showing an inability to delay instant gratification for a
long-term larger reward.
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
Betz cells are most abundant in layer...
A. IV of somatosensory cortex.
B. V of somatosensory cortex.
C. IV of motor cortex.
D. V of motor cortex.
E. III of motor cortex.
Question 2 A B C D E
A corticospinal neuron in primary motor cortex can do all of the following EXCEPT:
A. Project to multiple motor neuron pools in the spinal cord.
B. Participate in the initiation of movement.
C. Code for the amount of force of individual muscles.
D. Code for the direction of movement.
E. Code for the extent of movement.
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter03.html 10/10



1/7/25, 10:06 AM Spinal Reflexes and Descending Motor Pathways (Section 3, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neur…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 3: Motor Systems
Search
Chapter 2: Spinal Reflexes and Descending Motor Pathways
James Knierim, Ph.D., Department of Neuroscience, The Johns Hopkins University
2.1 Spinal Reflexes
As noted in the previous chapter, a sense of body position is necessary for adaptive motor control. In order to move a limb toward a
particular location, it is imperative to know the initial starting position of the limb, as well as any force applied to the limb. Muscle
spindles and Golgi tendon organs provide this type of information. In addition, these receptors are components of certain spinal
reflexes that are important for both clinical diagnosis as well as for a basic understanding of the principles of motor control.
Myotatic reflex (stretch reflex)
c 2000 UTHSCH
SN
Ia Afferent fiber
PLAY
+
a Motor neuron
Figure 2.1
Myotatic reflex. This is also known as the stretch reflex, the knee-jerk reflex, and
the deep tendon reflex.
Note: Locations of neurons within spinal cord are not meant to be anatomically
accurate.
The myotatic reflex is illustrated in Figure 2.1. A waiter is holding an empty tray, when unexpectedly a pitcher of water is placed
on the tray. Because the waiter’s muscles were not prepared to support the increased weight, the tray should fall. However, a spinal
reflex is automatically initiated to keep the tray relatively stable. When the heavy pitcher is placed on the tray, the increased weight
stretches the biceps muscle, which results in the activation of the muscle spindle’s Ia afferents. The Ia afferents have their cell
bodies in the dorsal root ganglia of the spinal cord, send projections into the spinal cord, and make synapses directly on alpha
motor neurons that innervate the same (homonymous) muscle. Thus, activation of the Ia afferent causes a monosynaptic activation
of the alpha motor neuron that causes the muscle to contract. As a result, the stretch of the muscle is quickly counteracted, and
the waiter is able to maintain the tray at the same position.
A major role of the myotatic reflex is the maintenance of posture. If one is standing upright and starts to sway to the left, muscles
in the legs and torso are stretched, activating the myotatic reflex to counteract the sway. In this way, the higher levels of the motor
system are able to send a simple command (“maintain current posture”) and then be uninvolved in its implementation. The lower
levels of the hierarchy implement the command with such mechanisms as the myotatic reflex, freeing the higher levels to perform
other tasks such as planning the next sequence of movements.
The myotatic reflex is an important clinical reflex. It is the same circuit that produces the knee-jerk, or stretch, reflex. When the
physician taps the patellar tendon with a hammer, this action causes the knee extensor muscle to stretch abruptly. This stretch
activates the myotatic reflex, causing an extension of the lower leg. (Because the physician taps the tendon, this reflex is also
referred to as the deep tendon reflex. Do not be confused, however, between this terminology and the Golgi tendon organ. The
myotatic reflex is initiated by the muscle spindle, not the Golgi tendon organ.) As discussed below, spinal reflexes can be modulated
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter02.html 1/11

1/7/25, 10:06 AM Spinal Reflexes and Descending Motor Pathways (Section 3, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neur…
by higher levels of the hierarchy, and thus a hyperactive or hypoactive stretch reflex is an important clinical sign to localize
neurological damage.
Reciprocal inhibition in the stretch reflex
Joints are controlled by two opposing sets of muscles, extensors and flexors, which must work in synchrony. Thus, when a muscle
spindle is stretched and the stretch reflex is activated, the opposing muscle group must be inhibited to prevent it from working
against the resulting contraction of the homonymous muscle (Figure 2.2). This inhibition is accomplished by an inhibitory
interneuron in the spinal cord. The Ia afferent of the muscle spindle bifurcates in the spinal cord (See Chapter 6 of Section I for
review). One branch innervates the alpha motor neuron that causes the homonymous muscle to contract, producing the behavioral
reflex. The other branch innervates the Ia inhibitory interneuron, which in turn innervates the alpha motor neuron that synapses
onto the opposing muscle. Because the interneuron is inhibitory, it prevents the opposing alpha motor neuron from firing, thereby
reducing the contraction of the opposing muscle. Without this reciprocal inhibition, both groups of muscles might contract
simultaneously and work against each other.
Ia Inhibitory interneuron
PLAY
SN
Ia Afferent fiber
a Motor neuron
a Motor neuron
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 2.2
Reciprocal inhibition in stretch reflex. Both extensor and flexor motor neurons are
firing to maintain the arm at its location. When the pitcher is placed on the tray,
the stretch reflex activates the flexor and inhibits the extensor.
Note: Locations of neurons within spinal cord are not meant to be anatomically
accurate.
Autogenic inhibition reflex
The Golgi tendon organ is involved in a spinal reflex known as the autogenic inhibition reflex (Figure 2.3). When tension is
applied to a muscle, the Group Ib fibers that innervate the Golgi tendon organ are activated. These afferents have their cell
bodies in the dorsal root ganglia, and they project into the spinal cord and synapse onto an interneuron called the Ib inhibitory
interneuron. This interneuron makes an inhibitory synapse onto the alpha motor neuron that innervates the same muscle that
caused the Ib afferent to fire.
PLAY
SSNN
Ib Afferent fiber
+
Inhibitory
_ interneuron
a Motor neuron
c 2000 UTHSCH
SS..LLiittttlleejjoohhnn
Figure 2.3
Autogenic inhibition. The alpha motor neuron fires to
contract the extensor muscle, until the Golgi tendon organ is
activated, thereby inhibiting the alpha motor neuron and
causing the leg to drop.
Note: Locations of neurons within spinal cord are not meant
to be anatomically accurate.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter02.html 2/11

1/7/25, 10:06 AM Spinal Reflexes and Descending Motor Pathways (Section 3, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neur…
As a result of this reflex, activation of the Ib afferent causes the muscle to cease contraction, as the alpha motor neuron becomes
inhibited. Because this reflex contains an interneuron between the sensory afferent and the motor neuron, it is an example of a
disynaptic reflex.
For many years, it was thought that the function of the autogenic inhibition circuit was to protect the muscle from excessive
amounts of force that might damage it. A classic example is that of the weightlifter straining to raise a heavy load, when suddenly
the autogenic inhibition reflex is activated and the muscle loses power, causing the weight to fall to the ground. This function was
ascribed to the reflex because early work suggested that the Golgi tendon organ was only activated when large amounts of force
were applied to it. More recent evidence indicates, however, that the Golgi tendon organ is sensitive to much lower levels of force
than previously believed. Thus, the autogenic inhibition reflex may be more extensively involved in motor control under normal
conditions. One possibility is that this reflex helps to spread the amount of work evenly across the entire muscle, so that all motor
units are working efficiently. That is, if some muscle fibers are bearing more of the load than others, their Golgi tendon organs will
be more active, which will tend to inhibit the contraction of those fibers. As a result, other muscle fibers that are less active will
have to contract more to pick up the slack, thereby sharing the work load more efficiently.
Reciprocal excitation in the autogenic inhibition reflex
Just as in the stretch reflex, the autogenic inhibition reflex must coordinate the activity of the extensor and flexor muscle groups
(Figure 2.4). The Ib afferent fiber bifurcates in the spinal cord. One branch innervates the Ib inhibitory interneuron. The other
branch innervates an excitatory interneuron that, in turn, innervates the alpha motor neuron that controls the antagonist muscle.
Thus, when the homonymous muscle is inhibited from contracting, the antagonist muscle is caused to contract, allowing the
opposing muscle groups to work in synchrony.
PLAY
SSNN
Ib Afferent fiber
Excitatory
interneuron
a Motor neuron
Inhibitory
interneuron
a Motor neuron
c 2000 UTHSCH
SS..LLiittttlleejjoohhnn
Figure 2.4
Reciprocal excitation in the autogenic inhibition reflex.
Note: Locations of neurons within spinal cord are not meant
to be anatomically accurate.
Flexor reflex
Spinal reflexes can be initiated by nonproprioceptive receptors as well as by proprioceptors. An important reflex initiated by
cutaneous receptors and pain receptors is the flexor reflex. We have all experienced this reflex after accidentally touching a hot
stove or a sharp object, as we withdraw our hand even before we consciously experience the sensation of pain. This quick reflex
removes the limb from the damaging stimulus more quickly than if the pain signal had to travel up to the brain, be brought to
conscious awareness, and then trigger a decision to withdraw the limb. The reflex circuit is illustrated in Figure 2.5. A sharp object
touching the foot causes the activation of Group III afferents of pain receptors. These afferents enter the spinal cord and then
travel up the cord. A branch of the afferent innervates an excitatory interneuron in the lumbar region of the spinal cord, which then
excites an alpha motor neuron that causes contraction of the thigh flexor muscle. The Group III afferent also continues upward to
the L2 vertebra, where another branch innervates an excitatory interneuron at this level. This interneuron excites the alpha motor
neurons that excite the hip flexor muscle, allowing the coordinated activity of two muscle groups to withdraw the whole leg away
from the painful stimulus. Thus, spinal reflexes work not only at a single joint; they can also coordinate the activity of multiple
joints simultaneously.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter02.html 3/11

1/7/25, 10:06 AM Spinal Reflexes and Descending Motor Pathways (Section 3, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neur…
PLAY Excitatory
interneuron
Alpha motor
neuron
Excitatory
interneuron
SN
Pain
receptor
Sharp tack
Group III
afferent fiber
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 2.5
Flexor reflex. (Nolte, 2002)
Note: Locations of neurons within spinal cord are not meant to be anatomically
accurate.
Reciprocal inhibition in the flexor reflex
When the knee joints and the hip joints are flexed, the antagonist extensor muscles must be inhibited (just as in the stretch reflex).
Thus, the Group III afferents innervate inhibitory interneurons that in turn innervate the alpha motor neurons controlling the
antagonist muscle.
Crossed extension reflex
Further circuitry is needed to make the flexor reflex adaptive. Because the weight of the body is supported by both legs, the
flexor reflex must coordinate the activity not only of the leg being withdrawn but also of the opposite leg (Figure 2.6). Imagine
stepping on a tack, and having the flexor reflex withdraw your right leg immediately. The left leg must simultaneously extend in
order to support the body weight that would have been supported by the right leg. Without this coordination of the two legs, the
shift in body mass would cause a loss of balance. Thus, the flexor reflex incorporates a crossed extension reflex. A branch of the
Group III afferent innervates an excitatory interneuron that sends its axon across the midline into the contralateral spinal cord.
There it excites the alpha motor neurons that innervate the extensor muscles of the opposite leg, allowing balance and body
posture to be maintained.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter02.html 4/11

1/7/25, 10:06 AM Spinal Reflexes and Descending Motor Pathways (Section 3, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neur…
Excitatory
interneuron
+
+
Excitatory
interneuron
PLAY +
Alpha motor +
neuron
Excitatory
interneuron
+
+
Alpha motor
neuron
SN
Pain
receptor
Sharp tack
Group III
afferent fiber c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 2.6
Crossed extension reflex. (Nolte, 2002)
Note: Locations of neurons within spinal cord are not meant to be anatomically
accurate.
Recurrent inhibition of motor neurons (Renshaw cells)
Axons of alpha motor neurons bifurcate in the spinal cord and innervate a special inhibitory interneuron called the Renshaw cell
(Figure 2.7). This interneuron innervates and inhibits the very same motor neuron that caused it to fire. Thus, a motor neuron
regulates its own activity by inhibiting itself when it fires. This negative feedback loop is thought to stabilize the firing rate of motor
neurons.
Renshaw cell
PLAY
a Motor neuron
c 2000 UTHSCH
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter02.html 5/11

1/7/25, 10:06 AM Spinal Reflexes and Descending Motor Pathways (Section 3, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neur…
Figure 2.7
Renshaw cell.
2.2 Descending Motor Pathways
The reflex circuits demonstrate that sophisticated neural processing occurs at the lowest level of the motor hierarchy. These
automatic reflexes can be modulated, however, by higher levels of the hierarchy. For example, when touching an iron to see if it is
hot, your flexor reflex may be hypersensitive. As a result, you pull your hand away repeatedly before even touching the iron,
anticipating that it may be hot. Conversely, if you remove a hot dish from the oven and the heat starts to go through the oven mitt,
you will suppress the flexor response so that you do not drop your dinner as you rush to put it down on a table. These modulations
(both facilitatory and inhibitory) of the spinal reflexes arise from the descending pathways from the brainstem and cortex.
Voluntary movement and some sensory-driven reflex actions are also controlled by the descending pathways. The corticospinal
system controls motor neurons and interneurons in the spinal cord. The corticobulbar system controls brainstem nuclei that
innervate cranial muscles.
Parallel and Serial Processing
Although the motor system is organized hierarchically, the hierarchy is not a simple chain of processing from higher to lower areas.
Many pathways enable the different levels of the hierarchy to influence each other. Thus, the flow of information through the motor
system has both a serial organization (communication between levels) and a parallel organization (multiple pathways between each
level). This parallel organization is critically important in understanding the various dysfunctions that can result from damage to the
motor system. If the motor hierarchy had a strictly serial organization, like a series of links on a chain, then damage to any part of
the system would produce severe deficits or paralysis in almost all types of movements. However, because of the parallel nature of
processing, paralysis is actually a relatively rare outcome, produced by damage to the lowest level of the hierarchy. Damage to
higher levels results in deficits in motor planning, initiation, coordination, and so forth, but movement is still possible. The parallel
nature of organization is also important for the ability of undamaged parts of the motor system to compensate (at least partially)
for injuries to other parts of the system.
Descending motor pathways arise from multiple regions of the brain and send axons down the spinal cord that innervate alpha
motor neurons, gamma motor neurons, and interneurons. The motor neurons are topographically organized in the anterior horn of
the spinal cord according to two rules: the flexor-extensor rule and the proximal-distal rule (Figure 2.8).
Figure 2.8
Flexor-extensor rule and proximal-distal
rule.
Flexor-extensor rule: motor neurons that innervate flexor muscles are located posteriorly to motor neurons that innervate
extensor muscles.
Proximal-distal rule: motor neurons that innervate distal muscles (e.g., hand muscles) are located lateral to motor neurons that
innervate proximal muscles (e.g., trunk muscles).
Descending motor pathways are organized into two major groups:
1. Lateral pathways control both proximal and distal muscles and are responsible for most voluntary movements of arms and
legs. They include the
a. lateral corticospinal tract
b. rubrospinal tract
2. Medial pathways control axial muscles and are responsible for posture, balance, and coarse control of axial and proximal
muscles. They include the
a. vestibulospinal tracts (both lateral and medial)
b. reticulospinal tracts (both pontine and medullary)
c. tectospinal tract
d. anterior corticospinal tract
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter02.html 6/11

1/7/25, 10:06 AM Spinal Reflexes and Descending Motor Pathways (Section 3, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neur…
PLAY
crus cerebri
corticofugal fibers
pyramid
pyramidal decussation
lateral funiculus
anterior funiculus
Figure 2.9
Corticospinal tracts (also called pyramidal tracts).
Click on the labels to see the highlighted area.
Corticospinal tracts. The corticospinal tract originates in the motor cortex (Figure 2.9). The axons of motor projection neurons
collect in the internal capsule, and then course through the crus cerebri (cerebral peduncle) in the midbrain. At the level of the
medulla, these axons form the medullary pyramids on the ventral surface of the brainstem (hence, this tract is also called the
pyramidal tract). At the level of the caudal medulla, the corticospinal tract splits into two tracts. Approximately 90% of the axons
cross over to the contralateral side at the pyramidal decussation, forming the lateral corticospinal tract. These axons continue to
course through the lateral funiculus of the spinal cord, before synapsing either directly onto alpha motor neurons or onto
interneurons in the ventral horn. The remaining 10% of the axons that do not cross at the caudal medulla constitute the anterior
corticospinal tract, as they continue down the spinal cord in the anterior funiculus. When they reach the spinal segment at which
they terminate, they cross over to the contralateral side through the anterior white commissure and innervate alpha motor neurons
or interneurons in the anterior horn. Thus, both the lateral and anterior corticospinal tracts are crossed pathways; they cross the
midline at different locations, however.
Function. The corticospinal tract (along with the corticobulbar tract) is the primary pathway that carries the motor commands that
underlie voluntary movement. The lateral corticospinal tract is responsible for the control of the distal musculature and the
anterior corticospinal tract is responsible for the control of the proximal musculature. A particularly important function of the
lateral corticospinal tract is the fine control of the digits of the hand. The corticospinal tract is the only descending pathway in which
some axons make synaptic contacts directly onto alpha motor neurons. This direct cortical innervation presumably is necessary to
allow the powerful processing networks of the cortex to control the activity of the spinal circuits that direct the exquisite
movements of the fingers and hands. The percentage of axons in the corticospinal tract that innervate alpha motor neurons directly
is greater in humans and nonhuman primates than in other mammals, presumably reflecting the increased manual dexterity of
primates. Damage to the corticospinal tract results in a permanent loss of the fine control of the extremities. Although parallel
descending pathways can often recover the function of more coarse movements, these pathways are not capable of generating fine,
skilled movements. In addition to the fine control of distal muscles, the corticospinal tract also plays a role in the voluntary control
of axial muscles.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter02.html 7/11

1/7/25, 10:06 AM Spinal Reflexes and Descending Motor Pathways (Section 3, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neur…
PLAY
Figure 2.10
Rubrospinal tract.
Click on the labels to see the highlighted area.
Rubrospinal tract. The rubrospinal tract originates in the red nucleus of the midbrain (Figure 2.10). The axons immediately cross
to the contralateral side of the brain, and they course through the brainstem and the lateral funiculus of the spinal cord. The axons
innervate spinal neurons at all levels of the spinal cord.
Function. The rubrospinal tract is an alternative by which voluntary motor commands can be sent to the spinal cord. Although it is a
major pathway in many animals, it is relatively minor in humans. Activation of this tract causes excitation of flexor muscles and
inhibition of extensor muscles. The rubrospinal tract is thought to play a role in movement velocity, as rubrospinal lesions cause a
temporary slowness in movement. In addition, because the red nucleus receives most of its input from the cerebellum, the
rubrospinal tract probably plays a role in transmitting learned motor commands from the cerebellum to the musculature. The red
nucleus also receives some input from the motor cortex, and it is therefore probably an important pathway for the recovery of some
voluntary motor function after damage to the corticospinal tract.
Vestibulospinal tracts. The two vestibulospinal tracts originate in 2 of the 4 vestibular nuclei (Figure 2.11). The lateral
vestibulospinal tract originates in the lateral vestibular nucleus. It courses through the brainstem and through the anterior
funiculus of the spinal cord on the ipsilateral side, before exiting ipsilaterally at all levels of the spinal cord. The medial
vestibulospinal tract originates in the medial vestibular nucleus, splits immediately and courses bilaterally through the
brainstem via the medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF) and through the anterior funiculus of the spinal cord, before exiting at or
above the T6 vertebra.
Function. The vestibulospinal tracts mediate postural adjustments and head movements. They also help the body to maintain
balance. Small movements of the body are detected by the vestibular sensory neurons, and motor commands to counteract these
movements are sent through the vestibulospinal tracts to appropriate muscle groups throughout the body. The lateral
vestibulospinal tract excites antigravity muscles in order to exert control over postural changes necessary to compensate for tilts
and movements of the body. The medial vestibulospinal tract innervates neck muscles in order to stabilize head position as one
moves around the world. It is also important for the coordination of head and eye movements.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter02.html 8/11

1/7/25, 10:06 AM Spinal Reflexes and Descending Motor Pathways (Section 3, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neur…
c 2000 UTHSCH
lateral vestibulospinal tract
lateral vestibular nucleus
medial vestibulospinal tract medial vestibular nucleus
medial longitudinal fasciculus
lateral vestibulospinal tract
PPLLAAYY
medial vestibulospinal tract
PLAY
BOTH anterior funiculus
Figure 2.11
Vestibulospinal tracts.
Click on the labels to see the highlighted area.
Reticulospinal tracts. The two reticulospinal tracts originate in the brainstem reticular formation, a large, diffusely organized
collection of neurons in the pons and medulla (Figure 2.12).
The pontine reticulospinal tract originates in the pontine reticular formation, courses ipsilaterally through the medial
longitudinal fasciculus and through the anterior funiculus of the spinal cord, and exits ipsilaterally at all spinal levels. The
medullary reticulospinal tract originates in the medullary reticular formation, courses mainly ipsilaterally (although some
fibers cross the midline) through the anterior funiculus of the spinal cord, and exits at all spinal levels.
Function. The reticulospinal tracts are a major alternative to the corticospinal tract, by which cortical neurons can control motor
function by their inputs onto reticular neurons. These tracts regulate the sensitivity of flexor responses to ensure that only noxious
stimuli elicit the responses. Damage to the reticulospinal tract can thus cause harmless stimuli, such as gentle touches, to elicit a
flexor reflex. The reticular formation also contains circuitry for many complex actions, such as orienting, stretching, and
maintaining a complex posture. Commands that initiate locomotor circuits in the spinal cord are also thought to be transmitted
through the medullary reticulospinal tract. Thus, the reticulospinal tracts are involved in many aspects of motor control, including
the integration of sensory input to guide motor output.
c 2000 UTHSCH
medial longitudinal fasciculus
pontine reticulospinal tract
pontine reticular formation
medial longitudinal fasciculus
medullary reticulospinal tract
medullary reticular formation
pontine reticulospinal tract
PLAY
medullary reticulospinal tract
PLAY
BOTH anterior funiculus
Figure 2.12
Reticulospinal tracts.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter02.html 9/11

1/7/25, 10:06 AM Spinal Reflexes and Descending Motor Pathways (Section 3, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neur…
Click on the labels to see the highlighted area.
Tectospinal tract. The tectospinal tract (Figure 2.13) originates in the deep layers of the superior colliculus and crosses the
midline immediately. It then courses through the pons and medulla, just anterior to the medial longitudinal fasciculus. It courses
through the anterior funiculus of the spinal cord, where the majority of the fibers terminate in the upper cervical levels.
Function. Little is known about the function of the tectospinal tract, but because of the nature of the visual response properties of
neurons in the superior colliculus (the optic tectum), it is presumably involved in the reflexive turning of the head to orient to visual
stimuli.
PLAY superior colliculus
medial longitudinal fasciculus
tectospinal tract
medial longitudinal fasciculus
tectospinal tract
anterior funiculus
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 2.13
Tectospinal tract.
Click on the labels to see the highlighted area.
2.3 Influences of Descending Pathways on Spinal Circuits
Voluntary movement. The most distinctive function of the descending motor pathways is the control of voluntary movement.
These movements are initiated in the cerebral cortex, and the motor commands are transmitted to the musculature through a
variety of descending pathways, including the corticospinal tract, the rubrospinal tract, and reticulospinal tracts. How voluntary
movements are initiated and coordinated by the motor cortex is the subject of the next chapter.
Reflex modulation. Another critical function of the descending motor pathways is to modulate the reflex circuits in the spinal cord.
The adaptiveness of spinal reflexes can change depending on the behavioral context; sometimes the gain (strength) or even the
sign (extension vs. flexion) of a reflex must be changed in order to make the resulting movement adaptive. The descending
pathways are responsible for controlling these variables. For example, consider the flexor reflex under two conditions.
a. Imagine a situation in which you want to pick up a dish from the stove top, but you are uncertain whether it is hot or cold.
You may attempt to lightly touch the surface, and this will often lower the threshold of the flexor reflex, making you more
likely to pull your hand away even if the dish is not particularly hot. (You may even withdraw your hand numerous times
before even touching the dish!) Descending pathways have lowered the threshold for producing the reflex in this case, making
it easier for a weaker nociceptive input to trigger the reflex; these pathways can also change the gain of the reflex, making
the withdrawal response greater than usual.
b. Imagine now picking up the dish in order to move it to the table. As you hold the dish, more of its heat begins to transfer to
your hand, and it starts to get quite hot. Rather than dropping the dish and spilling your dinner all over the floor, you rush to
the table to put it down, before withdrawing your hand and wishing you had used an oven mitt. In this case, the descending
pathways inhibited the flexor response.
Gamma bias. Recall from the previous chapter that there are two types of spinal motor neurons. Alpha motor neurons innervate
extrafusal muscle fibers, which provide the force for a muscle contraction. Gamma motor neurons innervate the ends of
intrafusal fibers and help to maintain the tautness of muscle spindles, such that they are sensitive to changes of muscle length
over a wide range. In order to work adaptively, the activity of alpha and gamma motor neurons must be coordinated. Thus,
whenever motor commands are sent by descending pathways to alpha motor neurons, the appropriate compensating commands
are sent to gamma motor neurons. This coordination of alpha-gamma motor commands is called alpha-gamma coactivation, and
the adjustment of spindle sensitivity by gamma activation is called gamma bias. Consider the following two examples:
a. When a command is given to a muscle to contract, the muscle spindles become slack, thereby making them insensitive to
further changes in muscle length. To compensate for this, the gamma motor neurons that innervate these intrafusal muscle
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter02.html 10/11

1/7/25, 10:06 AM Spinal Reflexes and Descending Motor Pathways (Section 3, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neur…
fibers are activated in concert with the alpha motor neurons, allowing the intrafusal fibers to contract with the muscle. This
preserves the sensitivity of the muscle to unexpected stretches of the muscle (see Figure 1.10 of the chapter on Motor Unit
and Muscle Receptors).
b. When a muscle contracts, the antagonist muscle is stretched during the movement. An obvious problem arises when one
considers the stretch reflex of the antagonist muscle. If contraction of a muscle causes the activation of the stretch reflex of
the antagonist muscle, the antagonist muscle will contract to resist the movement of the limb. How is it possible to ever flex a
joint when the stretch reflex of the extensor muscle causes it to extend the joint instead? Alpha-gamma coactivation solves
this problem by relaxing the contraction of the intrafusal fibers of the antagonist muscle, allowing the muscle to be stretched
without triggering the stretch reflex during a voluntary movement.
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
The lateral corticospinal tract...
A. Undergoes a 50% decussation in the caudal medulla.
B. Arises exclusively from the primary motor cortex.
C. Is an uncrossed pathway.
D. Plays a major role in the fine control of distal musculature.
E. Terminates primarily in the posterior (dorsal) horn.
Question 2 A B C D E
In reciprocal excitation of the Golgi tendon reflex, stimulation of...
A. Ia afferent fibers causes inhibition of synergistic muscles.
B. Ib afferent fibers causes inhibition of antagonist muscles.
C. Ia afferent fibers causes inhibition of antagonist muscles.
D. Ib afferent fibers causes excitation of antagonist muscles.
E. Ia afferent fibers causes excitation of muscles on the contralateral side.
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter02.html 11/11



1/7/25, 10:06 AM Motor Units and Muscle Receptors (Section 3, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | De…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 3: Motor Systems
Search
Chapter 1: Motor Units and Muscle Receptors
James Knierim, Ph.D., Department of Neuroscience, The Johns Hopkins University
Last Review 20 Oct 2020
1.1 What is Motor Control?
Figure 1.1
Sensory receptors provide
information about the
environment, which is then
used to produce action to
change the environment.
Sometimes the pathway from
sensation to action is direct,
as in a reflex. In most cases,
however, cognitive
processing occurs to make
actions adaptive and
appropriate for the particular
situation.
Much of the brain and nervous system is devoted to the processing of sensory input, in order to construct detailed representations
of the external environment.
Through vision, audition, somatosensation, and the other senses, we perceive the world and our relationship to it. This elaborate
processing would be of limited value, however, unless we had a way to act upon the environment that we are sensing, whether that
action consist of running away from a predator; seeking shelter against the rain; searching for food when one is hungry; moving
one’s lips and vocal cords in order to communicate with others; or performing the countless other varieties of actions that make up
our daily lives. In some cases the relationship between the sensory input and the motor output are simple and direct; for example,
touching a hot stove elicits an immediate withdrawal of the hand (Figure 1.1). Usually, however, our conscious actions require not
only sensory input but a host of other cognitive processes that allow us to choose the most appropriate motor output for the given
circumstances. In each case, the final output is a set of commands to certain muscles in the body to exert force against some other
object or forces (e.g., gravity). This entire process falls under the subject of motor control.
1.2 Some Necessary Components of Proper Motor Control
1. Volition. The motor system must generate movements that are adaptive and that accomplish the goals of the organism.
These goals are evaluated and set by high-order areas of the brain. The motor system must transform the goals into the
appropriate activations of muscles to perform the desired movements.
2. Coordination of signals to many muscle groups. Few movements are restricted to the activation of a single muscle. For
example, the act of moving your hand from inside your pocket to a position in front of you requires the coordinated activity of
the shoulder, elbow, and wrist. Making the same movement while removing a 2-lb weight from your pocket may result in the
same trajectory of your hand, but will require different sets of forces on the muscles that make the movement. The task of
the motor system is to determine the necessary forces and coordination at each joint in order to produce the final, smooth
motion of the arm.
3. Proprioception. In order to make a desired movement (e.g., raising your hand to ask a question), it is essential for the
motor system to know the starting position of the hand. Raising one’s hand from a resting position on a desk, compared to a
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter01.html 1/10

1/7/25, 10:06 AM Motor Units and Muscle Receptors (Section 3, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | De…
resting position on top of the head, results in the same final position of the arm, but these two movements require different
patterns of muscle activation. The motor system has a set of sensory inputs (called proprioceptors) that inform it of the
length of muscles and the forces being applied to them; it uses this information to calculate joint position and other variables
necessary to make the appropriate movement.
4. Postural adjustments. The motor system must constantly produce postural adjustments in order to compensate for
changes in the body’s center of mass as we move our limbs, head, and torso. Without these automatic adjustments, the
simple act of reaching for a cup would cause us to fall, as the body’s center of mass shifts to a location in front of the body
axis.
5. Sensory feedback. In addition to the use of proprioception to sense the position of the body before a movement, the motor
system must use other sensory information in order to perform the movement accurately. By comparing desired activity with
actual activity, sensory feedback allows for corrections in movements as they take place, and it also allows modifications to
motor programs so that future movements are performed more accurately.
6. Compensation for the physical characteristics of the body and muscles. To exert a defined force on an object, it is not
sufficient to know only the characteristics of the object (e.g., its mass, size, etc.). The motor system must account for the
physical characteristics of the body and muscles themselves. The bones and muscles have mass that must be considered
when moving a joint, and the muscles themselves have a certain degree of resistance to movement.
7. Unconscious processing. The motor system must perform many procedures in an automatic fashion, without the need for
high-order control. Imagine if walking across the room required thinking about planting the foot at each step, paying attention
to the movement of each muscle in the leg and making sure that the appropriate forces and contraction speeds are taking
place. It would be hard to do anything else but that one task. Instead, many motor tasks are performed in an automatic
fashion that does not require conscious processing. For example, many of the postural adjustments that the body makes
during movement are performed without our awareness. These unconscious processes allow higher-order brain areas to
concern themselves with broad desires and goals, rather than low-level implementations of movements.
8. Adaptability. The motor system must adapt to changing circumstances. For example, as a child grows and its body changes,
different constraints are placed on the motor system in terms of the size and mass of bones and muscles. The motor
commands that work to raise the hand of an infant would fail completely to raise the hand of an adult. The system must adapt
over time to change its output to accomplish the same goals. Furthermore, if the system were unable to adapt, we would
never be able to acquire motor skills, such as playing a piano, hitting a baseball, or performing microsurgery.
These are some of the many components of the motor system that allow us to perform complex movements in a seemingly
effortless way. The brain has evolved exceedingly complex and sophisticated mechanisms to perform these tasks, and researchers
have only scratched the surface in understanding the principles that underlie the brain’s control of movement.
1.3 Motor Control Requires Sensory Input
One of the major principles of the motor system is that motor control requires sensory input to accurately plan and execute
movements. This principle applies to low levels of the hierarchy, such as spinal reflexes, and to higher levels. As we shall see
throughout this material on the motor system, our abilities to make movements that are accurate, properly timed, and with proper
force depend critically on the sensory input that is ubiquitous at all levels of the motor system hierarchy.
1.4 Functional Segregation and Hierarchical Organization
The ease with which we make most of our movements belies the enormous sophistication and complexity of the motor system.
Engineers have spent decades trying to make machines perform simple tasks that we take for granted, yet the most advanced
robotic systems do not come close to emulating the precision and smoothness of movement, under all types of conditions, that we
achieve effortlessly and automatically. How does the brain do it? Although many of the details are not understood, two broad
principles appear to be key concepts toward understanding motor control:
Functional Segregation. The motor system is divided into a number of different areas that control different aspects of
movement (a “divide and conquer” strategy). These areas are located throughout the nervous system. One of the key
questions of research on motor control is to understand the functional roles played by each area.
Hierarchical Organization. The different areas of the motor system are organized in a hierarchical fashion. The higher-order
areas can concern themselves with more global tasks regarding action, such as deciding when to act, devising an appropriate
sequence of actions, and coordinating the activity of many limbs. They do not have to program the exact force and velocity of
individual muscles, or coordinate movements with changes in posture; these low-level tasks are performed by the lower levels
of the hierarchy.
The motor system hierarchy consists of 4 levels (Figure 1.2): the spinal cord, the brain stem, the motor cortex, and the association
cortex. It also contains two side loops: the basal ganglia and the cerebellum, which interact with the hierarchy through connections
with the thalamus.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter01.html 2/10

1/7/25, 10:06 AM Motor Units and Muscle Receptors (Section 3, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | De…
Level 4: Association Cortex
Side Loop 1:
Basal Ganglia
Level 3: Motor Cortex
(Caudate Nucleus, Putamen,
(Primary Motor Cortex, Premotor Cortex, Globus Pallidus, Substantia Nigra,
Supplementary Motor Area) Subthalamic Nucleus)
Thalamus
Level 2: Brain Stem
(Red Nucleus, Reticular
Formation, Vestibular Nuclei,
Tectum, Pontine Nuclei, Side Loop 2:
Inferior Olive ) Cerebellum
Level 1: Spinal Cord
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 1.2
Schematic representation of the different levels and interconnections of the motor system hierarchy. The brain figure on the
left is a schematic version of an idealized brain section that contains the major structures of the motor system hierarchy for
illustrative purposes; no actual brain section would contain all of these structures. Tap on each box on the right to highlight
the inputs (blue) and outputs (red) of each region.
1.5 The Spinal Cord: The First Hierarchical Level
The spinal cord is the first level of the motor hierarchy. It is the site where motor neurons are located. It is also the site of many
interneurons and complex neural circuits that perform the “nuts and bolts” processing of motor control. These circuits execute the
low-level commands that generate the proper forces on individual muscles and muscle groups to enable adaptive movements. The
spinal cord also contains complex circuitry for such rhythmic behaviors as walking. Because this low level of the hierarchy takes
care of these basic functions, higher levels (such as the motor cortex) can process information related to the planning of
movements, the construction of adaptive sequences of movements, and the coordination of whole-body movements, without having
to encode the precise details of each muscle contraction.
1.6 Motor Neurons
Alpha motor neurons (also called lower motor neurons) innervate skeletal muscle and cause the muscle contractions that
generate movement. Motor neurons release the neurotransmitter acetylcholine at a synapse called the neuromuscular junction.
When the acetylcholine binds to acetylcholine receptors on the muscle fiber, an action potential is propagated along the muscle fiber
in both directions (see Chapter 4 of Section I for review). The action potential triggers the contraction of the muscle. If the ends of
the muscle are fixed, keeping the muscle at the same length, then the contraction results on an increased force on the supports
(isometric contraction). If the muscle shortens against no resistance, the contraction results in constant force (isotonic
contraction). The motor neurons that control limb and body movements are located in the anterior horn of the spinal cord, and
the motor neurons that control head and facial movements are located in the motor nuclei of the brainstem. Even though the motor
system is composed of many different types of neurons scattered throughout the CNS, the motor neuron is the only way in which
the motor system can communicate with the muscles. Thus, all movements ultimately depend on the activity of lower motor
neurons. The famous physiologist Sir Charles Sherrington referred to these motor neurons as the “final common pathway” in motor
processing.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter01.html 3/10

1/7/25, 10:06 AM Motor Units and Muscle Receptors (Section 3, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | De…
Figure 1.3
Spinal cord with motor neuron in anterior horn.
Motor neurons are not merely the conduits of motor commands generated from higher levels of the hierarchy. They are themselves
components of complex circuits that perform sophisticated information processing. As shown in Figure 1.3, motor neurons have
highly branched, elaborate dendritic trees, enabling them to integrate the inputs from large numbers of other neurons and to
calculate proper outputs.
Two terms are used to describe the anatomical relationship between motor neurons and muscles: the motor neuron pool and the
motor unit.
1. Motor neurons are clustered in columnar, spinal nuclei called motor neuron pools (or motor nuclei). All of the motor neurons
in a motor neuron pool innervate a single muscle (Figure 1.4), and all motor neurons that innervate a particular muscle are
contained in the same motor neuron pool. Thus, there is a one-to-one relationship between a muscle and a motor neuron
pool.
2. Each individual muscle fiber in a muscle is innervated by one, and only one, motor neuron (make sure you understand the
difference between a muscle and a muscle fiber). A single motor neuron, however, can innervate many muscle fibers. The
combination of an individual motor neuron and all of the muscle fibers that it innervates is called a motor unit. The number
of fibers innervated by a motor unit is called its innervation ratio.
Select:
Motor neuron pool
Motor unit
Figure 1.4
Motor unit and motor neuron pool.
If a muscle is required for fine control or for delicate movements (e.g., movement of the fingers or hands), its motor units will tend
to have small innervation ratios. That is, each motor neuron will innervate a small number of muscle fibers (10-100), enabling
many nuances of movement of the entire muscle. If a muscle is required only for coarse movements (e.g., a thigh muscle), its
motor units will tend to have a high innervation ratio (i.e., each motor neuron innervating 1000 or more muscle fibers), as there is
no necessity for individual muscle fibers to undergo highly coordinated, differential contractions to produce a fine movement.
1.7 Control of Muscle Force
A motor neuron controls the amount of force that is exerted by muscle fibers. There are two principles that govern the relationship
between motor neuron activity and muscle force: the rate code and the size principle.
1. Rate Code. Motor neurons use a rate code to signal the amount of force to be exerted by a muscle. An increase in the rate of
action potentials fired by the motor neuron causes an increase in the amount of force that the motor unit generates. This code
is illustrated in Figure 1.5. When the motor neuron fires a single action potential (Play 1), the muscle twitches slightly, and
then relaxes back to its resting state. If the motor neuron fires after the muscle has returned to baseline, then the magnitude
of the next muscle twitch will be the same as the first twitch. However, if the rate of firing of the motor neuron increases,
such that a second action potential occurs before the muscle has relaxed back to baseline, then the second action potential
produces a greater amount of force than the first (i.e., the strength of the muscle contraction summates) (Play 2). With
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter01.html 4/10

1/7/25, 10:06 AM Motor Units and Muscle Receptors (Section 3, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | De…
increasing firing rates, the summation grows stronger, up to a limit. When the successive action potentials no longer produce
a summation of muscle contraction (because the muscle is at its maximum state of contraction), the muscle is in a state
called tetanus (Play 3).
Input
a motor neuron spikes
muscle force
Force
PLAY 1 0
PLAY 2
PLAY 3
Max
Figure 1.5
Rate code for muscle force. The upper trace on the oscilloscope shows the action potentials
generated by the alpha motor neuron. The lower trace shows the force generated by the
isometrically contracting muscle. PLAY 1: Single spikes by the motor neuron produce small
twitches of the muscle. PLAY 2: Multiple spikes in succession summate to produce larger
contractions. PLAY 3: Very high rates of spikes produce maximal contraction called tetanus.
2. Size Principle. When a signal is sent to the motor neurons to execute a movement, motor neurons are not all recruited at
the same time or at random. The motor neuron size principle states that, with increasing strength of input onto motor
neurons, smaller motor neurons are recruited and fire action potentials before larger motor neurons are recruited. Why does
this orderly recruitment occur? Recall the relationship between voltage, current, and resistance (Ohm’s Law): V = IR.
Because smaller motor neurons have a smaller membrane surface area, they have fewer ion channels, and therefore a larger
input resistance. Larger motor neurons have more membrane surface and correspondingly more ion channels; therefore, they
have a smaller input resistance. Because of Ohm’s Law, a small amount of synaptic current will be sufficient to cause the
membrane potential of a small motor neuron to reach firing threshold, while the large motor neuron stays below threshold. As
the amount of current increases, the membrane potential of the larger motor neuron also increases, until it also reaches firing
threshold.
Figure 1.6 demonstrates how the size principle governs the amount of force generated by a muscle. Because motor units are
recruited in an orderly fashion, weak inputs onto motor neurons will cause only a few motor units to be active, resulting in a small
force exerted by the muscle (Play 1). With stronger inputs, more motor neurons will be recruited, resulting in more force applied to
the muscle (Play 2 and Play 3). Moreover, different types of muscle fibers are innervated by small and larger motor neurons. Small
motor neurons innervate slow-twitch fibers; intermediate-sized motor neurons innervate fast-twitch, fatigue-resistant fibers;
and large motor neurons innervate fast-twitch, fatigable muscle fibers. The slow-twitch fibers generate less force than the fast-
twitch fibers, but they are able to maintain these levels of force for long periods. These fibers are used for maintaining posture and
making other low-force movements. Fast-twitch, fatigue-resistant fibers are recruited when the input onto motor neurons is large
enough to recruit intermediate-sized motor neurons. These fibers generate more force than slow-twitch fibers, but they are not able
to maintain the force as long as the slow-twitch fibers. Finally, fast-twitch, fatigable fibers are recruited when the largest motor
neurons are activated. These fibers produce large amounts of force, but they fatigue very quickly. They are used when the
organism must generate a burst of large amounts of force, such as in an escape mechanism. Most muscles contain both fast- and
slow-twitch fibers, but in different proportions. Thus, the white meat of a chicken, used to control the wings, is composed primarily
of fast-twitch fibers, whereas the dark meat, used to maintain balance and posture, is composed primarily of slow-twitch fibers.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter01.html 5/10

1/7/25, 10:06 AM Motor Units and Muscle Receptors (Section 3, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | De…
Input
decending motor
pathway spikes
muscle force
Force
PLAY 0
Max
Figure 1.6
Size principle of muscle force. Upper trace of oscilloscope represents the action potentials of a descending pathway axon.
With low rates of activity of the descending pathway, only small alpha motor neurons are activated, producing small
amounts of muscle force (lower trace of oscilloscope). With increasing rates of descending pathway activity,
intermediate-size alpha motor neurons are activated in addition to the small neurons. Because more motor units are
activated, the muscle produces more force. Finally, with the highest rates of descending activity, the largest alpha motor
neurons are recruited, producing maximal muscle force.
1.8 Muscle Receptors and Proprioception
The motor system requires sensory input in order to function properly. In addition to sensory information about the external
environment, the motor system also requires sensory information about the current state of the muscles and limbs themselves.
Proprioception is the sense of the body’s position in space based on specialized receptors that reside in the muscles and tendons.
The muscle spindle signals the length of a muscle and changes in the length of a muscle. The Golgi tendon organ signals the
amount of force being applied to a muscle.
Muscle Spindles
Muscle spindles are collections of 6-8 specialized muscle fibers that are located within the muscle mass itself (Figure 1.7). These
fibers do not contribute significantly to the force generated by the muscle. Rather, they are specialized receptors that signal (a) the
length and (b) the rate of change of length (velocity) of the muscle. Because of the fusiform shape of the muscle spindle, these
fibers are referred to as intrafusal fibers. The large majority of muscle fibers that allow the muscle to do work are termed
extrafusal fibers. Each muscle contains many muscle spindles; muscles that are necessary for fine movements contain more
spindles than muscles that are used for posture or coarse movements.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter01.html 6/10

1/7/25, 10:06 AM Motor Units and Muscle Receptors (Section 3, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | De…
Figure 1.7
Muscle spindle and Golgi tendon organ.
1.9 Types of Muscle Spindle Fibers
Figure 1.8
Muscle spindle.
There are 3 types of muscle spindle fibers, characterized by their shape and the type of information they convey (Figure 1.8).
1. Nuclear Chain fibers. These fibers are so-named because their nuclei are aligned in a single row (chain) in the center of the
fiber. They signal information about the static length of the muscle.
2. Static Nuclear Bag fibers. These fibers are so-named because their nuclei are collected in a bundle in the middle of the
fiber. Like the nuclear chain fiber, these fibers signal information about the static length of a muscle.
3. Dynamic Nuclear Bag fibers. These fibers are anatomically similar to the static nuclear bag fibers, but they signal primarily
information about the rate of change (velocity) of muscle length.
A typical muscle spindle is composed of 1 dynamic nuclear bag fiber, 1 static nuclear bag fiber, and ~5 nuclear chain fibers.
1.10 Sensory Innervation of Muscle Spindles
Because the muscle spindle is located in parallel with the extrafusal fibers, it will stretch along with the muscle. The muscle spindle
signals muscle length and velocity to the CNS through two types of specialized sensory fibers that innervate the intrafusal fibers.
These sensory fibers have stretch receptors that open and close as a function of the length of the intrafusal fiber.
1. Group Ia afferents (also called primary afferents) wrap around the central portion of all 3 types of intrafusal fibers; these
specialized endings are called annulospiral endings. Because they innervate all 3 types of intrafusal fibers, Group Ia
afferents provide information about both length and velocity.
2. Group II afferents (also called secondary afferents) innervate the ends of the nuclear chain fibers and the static nuclear
bag fibers at specialized junctions termed flower spray endings. Because they do not innervate the dynamic nuclear bag
fibers, Group II afferents signal information about muscle length only.
Because of their patterns of innervation onto the three types of intrafusal fibers, Group Ia and Group II afferents respond differently
to different types of muscle movements. Figure 1.9 shows the responses of each type of afferent to a linear stretch of the muscle.
Initially, both Group Ia and Group II fibers fire at a certain rate, encoding the current length of the muscle. During the stretch, the
two types differ in their responses. The Group Ia afferent fires at a very high rate during the stretch, encoding the velocity of the
muscle length; at the end of the stretch, its firing decreases, as the muscle is no longer changing length. Note, however, that its
firing rate is still higher than it was before the stretch, as it is now encoding the new length of the muscle. Compare the response of
the Group Ia afferent to the Group II afferent. The Group II afferent increases its firing rate steadily as the muscle is stretched. Its
firing rate does not depend on the rate of change of the muscle; rather, its firing rate depends only on the immediate length of the
muscle.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter01.html 7/10

1/7/25, 10:06 AM Motor Units and Muscle Receptors (Section 3, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | De…
Dynamic Static Nuclear
nuclear nuclear chain
bag fiber bag fiber fiber
Ia
PLAY
II
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 1.9
Responses of muscle spindles. The Group Ia afferent responds at a
highest rate when the muscle is actively stretching, but also signals the
static length of the muscle because of its innervation of the static nuclear
bag fiber and the nuclear chain fiber. The Group II afferent signals only
the static length of the muscle, increasing its firing rate linearly as a
function of muscle length.
1.11 Gamma Motor Neurons
Although intrafusal fibers do not contribute significantly to muscle contraction, they do have contractile elements at their ends that
are innervated by motor neurons.
PLAY
Ia afferents
motor neuron c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 1.10
Alpha-gamma coactivation. The muscle starts at a certain
length, encoded by the firing of a Ia afferent. When the
muscle is stretched, the muscle spindle stretches and the Ia
afferent fires more strongly. When the muscle is released from
the stretch and contracts, the muscle spindle becomes slack,
causing the Ia afferent to fall silent. The muscle spindle is
rendered insensitive to further stretches of muscle. To restore
sensitivity, gamma motor neurons fire and cause the spindle
to contract, thereby becoming taut and able to signal the
muscle length again.
Motor neurons are divided into two groups. Alpha motor neurons innervate extrafusal fibers, the highly contracting fibers that
supply the muscle with its power. Gamma motor neurons innervate intrafusal fibers, which contract only slightly. The function
of intrafusal fiber contraction is not to provide force to the muscle; rather, gamma activation of the intrafusal fiber is necessary to
keep the muscle spindle taut, and therefore sensitive to stretch, over a wide range of muscle lengths. This concept is illustrated in
Figure 1.10. If a resting muscle is stretched, the muscle spindle becomes stretched in parallel, sending signals through the primary
and secondary afferents. A subsequent contraction of the muscle, however, removes the pull on the spindle, and it becomes slack,
causing the spindle afferents to cease firing. If the muscle were to be stretched again, the muscle spindle would not be able to
signal this stretch. Thus, the spindle is rendered temporarily insensitive to stretch after the muscle has contracted. Activation of
gamma motor neurons prevents this temporary insensitivity by causing a weak contraction of the intrafusal fibers, in parallel with
the contraction of the muscle. This contraction keeps the spindle taut at all times and maintains its sensitivity to changes in the
length of the muscle. Thus, when the CNS instructs a muscle to contract, it not only sends the appropriate signals to the alpha
motor neurons, it also instructs gamma motor neurons to contract the intrafusal fibers appropriately; this coordinated process is
referred to as alpha-gamma coactivation.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter01.html 8/10

1/7/25, 10:06 AM Motor Units and Muscle Receptors (Section 3, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | De…
1.12 Golgi Tendon Organ
c 2000 UTHSCH
PLAY
Muscle
Capsule
1b afferent
Tendon fiber
1 Terminal
Tendon
Figure 1.11
Golgi tendon organ.
The Golgi tendon organ is a specialized receptor that is located between the muscle and the tendon (Figure 1.7). Unlike the
muscle spindle, which is located in parallel with extrafusal fibers, the Golgi tendon organ is located in series with the muscle and
signals information about the load or force being applied to the muscle. A Golgi tendon organ is made up of a capsule containing
numerous collagen fibers (Figure 1.11). The organ is innervated by primary afferents called Group Ib fibers, which have
specialized endings that weave in between the collagen fibers. When force is applied to a muscle, the Golgi tendon organ is
stretched, causing the collagen fibers to squeeze and distort the membranes of the primary afferent sensory endings. As a result,
the afferent is depolarized, and it fires action potentials to signal the amount of force.
Figure 1.12 illustrates the difference in information conveyed by muscle spindles and Golgi tendon organs. At the resting position,
the Ia afferents of spindles in the triceps muscle fire at a steady rate to encode the present length of the muscle, and the Ib
afferents of the Golgi tendon organs of the biceps muscle fire at a low rate. When a light object (a balloon) is placed in the hand,
there is little change in the firing rate of either afferent. When the hand starts to rise, however, the triceps muscle is stretched, and
the Ia afferent fibers increase their firing rate as a function of muscle length. The Ib fibers do not change appreciably, because the
balloon does not add much load to the muscle. What if a heavy object (a bowling ball) were placed in the hand instead? Because a
heavy load is now placed on the biceps, the Ib afferents fire vigorously. Note that the Ia afferent is not affected, as the muscle
length has not changed. When the arm begins to rise, however, the Ia afferents fire, just as with the balloon.
Golgi tendon organ
bicep
Select:
tricep Balloon
Bowling ball
Muscle spindle
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 1.12
Difference between muscle spindle and Golgi tendon organ.
In summary,
1. Muscle spindles signal information about the length and velocity of a muscle
2. Golgi tendon organs signal information about the load or force applied to a muscle
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter01.html 9/10

1/7/25, 10:06 AM Motor Units and Muscle Receptors (Section 3, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | De…
Types of fibers contained within muscle spindles include...
A. Dynamic nuclear bag fibers
B. Dynamic nuclear chain fibers
C. Group Ib afferent fibers
D. Extrafusal fibers
E. Group IV afferent fibers
Question 2 A B C D E
Muscle force is controlled in part by...
A. Alpha-gamma coactivation
B. Intrafusal fibers
C. Rate code
D. Golgi tendon organs
E. Gamma motor neurons
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s3/chapter01.html 10/10



10-1
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Alexander Rajan, PhD
Austin Lim, PhD (DePaul University)
Andrea Gaede, PhD
Editor: Katie Willis, PhD (University of Oklahoma)
The motor system refers to the nerve knowing where you are, it’s difficult to plan a
cells that are used to control our body. The two route to your destination, and getting feedback
key roles of the motor system are to plan, control, along the way helps your brain know if it needs to
and execute voluntary (deliberate) movements, adjust the plan.
and to control involuntary (subconscious or Accordingly, think about motor control as
automatic) functions, such as digesting food. a set of nested loops, where motor and sensory
The motor system is sometimes described processes are closely intertwined. The main loop
as a top-down process: in a voluntary movement, is the descending (from brain to muscle) motor
neural activity in the frontal lobe sends commands command and the ascending (from muscle to
down to motor neurons located in the brainstem brain) sensory feedback. Examples of nested
or spinal cord, which in turn activate muscle loops within this circuit could include spinal cord-
groups. mediated reflexes and communication between
In reality, motor control is more of a loop, areas within the brain.
rapidly communicating between the sensory We will describe the process of motor
cortex and motor cortex. Sensory information control by first describing the signals that originate
about limb position, posture, and objects in in the brain, then tracing that signal down through
contact with the skin inform the descending motor the brain stem, spinal cord, the neuromuscular
plan. Simultaneously, the motor plan provides junction, and finally the muscles.
predictions about upcoming movement. Without
Chapter 10 outline
10.1 Motor Control in the Brain
10.2 Modifiers of Descending Information
10.3 The Spinal Cord
10.4 The Muscles
10-2
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

10.1 Motor Control in the Brain
All voluntary (or non-reflexive) for initiation of motor control. Primates have many
movements begin as signals in the brain. cortical areas dedicated to movement, which
Specifically, the neurons involved in motor allows for fine control of small muscle groups,
control are primarily found in the frontal lobe of complicated patterns of movements, and long-
the telencephalon, which includes areas such as term planning of motor action.
primary motor cortex (or M1), premotor cortex, With respect to motor control, the
and supplemental motor areas. The posterior prefrontal cortex (PFC) initiates the long-term
parietal cortex also contributes to movement. planning or cognitive aspects of movements. For
Through this section, we will walk through example, consider the motor actions related to
the brain processes leading to voluntary motor brushing your teeth. PFC signals are more akin
action, beginning at the highest areas of the to “brushing is good for my hygiene and health”,
hierarchy. rather than “move my arm and open my mouth.”
PFC also helps determine if some motor
Association cortices action is appropriate for the specific situation.
Neural control of voluntary movement Think of a behavioral test where you are given
begins with high order thought processes which two clickers, one to hold in each hand. You are
are carried out by two major associative areas, told that when the experimenter shows you a
the prefrontal cortex and the posterior parietal green item, you should click with the right button.
cortex. These areas do not specifically correlate After repeating this behavior multiple times, you
with specific muscle groups, and activation of are told to switch - now, when you see a green
these neurons do not necessarily cause muscle item, you need to click the left button. In this
activity. Instead, these structures are important experiment, PFC is responsible for deciding
which motor pattern (left button or right button
press) is appropriate in response to the stimulus.
PFC also works to weigh the consequences
of motor actions, and makes updates about future
motor actions in similar or different circumstances.
The exact same motor action produces different
results depending on the specific situation, and
PFC contributes to evaluating and predicting
outcomes. For example, the Wisconsin Card
Sorting Task is a human behavioral test that is
strongly dependent on PFC activity. In this task, a
Figure 10.1 Anterior view (left) and lateral view patient is asked to classify cards based on criteria,
(right) of one hemisphere showing the location of such as number, shape, or color. The patient is
the prefrontal cortex (red). told whether they are correct or wrong; however,
the criteria will occasionally change without them
10-3
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

being explicitly informed. The ability to shift to a M1 Posterior
SMA
new set of rules is PFC mediated. parietal cortex
PM
Dorsolateral
PFC
Target FEF V1
S1 A1
Figure 10.2 In the Wisconsin Card Sorting Task, Figure 10.3 The posterior parietal cortex is part
the target card (bottom) could be placed in of the dorsal stream, and integrates sensory
category 1 (matching color), category 2 (matching information with motor commands.
number of objects), or category 4 (matching
shape). Ability to switch to a new set of rules uses are found in the posterior aspect of the frontal
prefrontal cortex. lobe, directly adjacent to the central sulcus. The
PM is the anterior most structure, and SMA is
The other major associative cortex more dorsal to the PM along the medial aspect
contributing to motor function is the posterior of the brain. M1 is posterior to that, bordering the
parietal cortex, which is largely concerned central sulcus. Generally speaking, information
integrating somatosensory with visual information from the associative cortices travel through PM,
and determining an appropriate motor action. then M1, before projecting down through the
For example, if you were planning to get up from brain stem and spinal cord.
your seat to walk across the room, the posterior These three structures are not an
parietal cortex would take in the somatosensory exhaustive list of motor cortex structures,
proprioceptive information about how your body however. For example, the frontal eye field (FEF)
is positioned, and the visual information from the communicates with the extraocular muscles and
objects in the room to avoid running into them mediates saccadic eye movements (chapter
(recall the dorsal stream pathway; chapter 7.4). 7.4). The inferior frontal gyrus, or Broca’s
area, contributes to motor processes related to
Motor cortex language (chapter 14).
The motor cortex is made up of three The premotor area (PM) modulates motor
closely related brain structures that contribute output, and generally activates prior to motor
to execution of movement: premotor area (PM), activity. For example, if monkeys are trained to
supplemental motor area (SMA), and primary press on a button on a delay in response to a
motor cortex (or M1). These motor cortex areas specific light cue, PM neurons will increase activity
10-4
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

V1
10-5
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com
sekipS
upon presentation to the light cue, even before the The supplemental motor area (SMA) is
arm or hand begins to move. Also, activity of PM upstream of primary motor cortex, but also sends
increases as we imagine performing a complex downward projections through spinal cord. SMA
series of finger patterns, such as during mental communicates bilaterally, and lesioning this area
rehearsal of guitar or violin. causes deficits in manual coordination tasks that
There is debate about the existence of a require both hemispheres to communicate. For
special population of cells in PM called mirror example, in one monkey study, animals were
neurons. These are cells that are active during a presented with a table in which was a hole stuffed
movement, but also when that same movement is with a food reward. In order to obtain the food
observed in another animal or person. Proponents reward, the monkey needed to use one hand to
argue that these neurons are involved in learning push, and the other hand to catch. Lesions of SMA
behaviors and for understanding the behaviors caused the monkey to try to push the food from
of others. However, given the complexity of the both sides simultaneously. This suggests that
task of understanding others, it is unlikely to be SMA is responsible for the proper communication
encoded at the level of individual neurons. between motor commands in both hemispheres.
Primary motor cortex (M1) is a major
motor control center, required for deliberate,
voluntary movements, movements made in
response to a “command.” Furthermore, motor
cortex cells influence motor neurons, neurons
that communicate down into spinal cord that
ultimately influence muscles or glands. This
connection is so strong that the motor cortex cells
are sometimes called upper motor neurons.
In this terminology, a lower motor neuron is
found at the brain stem or spinal cord, and fires
whenever the upper motor neuron sends a signal.
In the 1930s, neurosurgeon Wilder
Shank 1
Penfield conducted several brain operations to
treat patients with severe epilepsy. However,
since the brain has no pain receptors, he was
Shank 2
able to remove a portion of the skull under local
anesthesia while the patients were awake and
responding to his questions. During surgery, the
goal was to electrically stimulate portions of the
cortex to determine the origin of the seizures,
Figure 10.4 Surgically implanted electrodes and to ensure that areas critical to speech and
(top) in a marmoset brain. While viewing a fellow hand movement are left untouched so that the
marmoset reaching (bottom left), mirror neuron patient will not have major impairments following
activity increases (bottom right). surgery. This is currently done in neuro-oncology

control the thumb, and near other populations of
M1
neurons that control the index finger. A graphical
Brain
representation of this map is called the “motor
homunculus,” in which body parts with larger
representations in the brain are shown with larger
size (much like the sensory homunculus; chapter
8.3).
Spinal Cord
Upper motor neuron
Muscle
Lower motor neuron
Figure 10.5 Relationship between upper motor
neurons in M1 and the lower motor neurons
further down of the signaling pathway.
to reduce the loss of critical motor function and
overall morbidity.
Penfield progressively moved across
different brain areas of M1 while using an electrode
to stimulate patches of the cortex. He had two
major observations. First, stimulation caused
contralateral activity: that is, stimulating the left
side of the brain affects the muscle activity of the
right side of the body. Secondly, by systematically
moving across M1, he observed that different
populations of neurons are responsible for
communicating with specific muscle groups.
For instance, dorsal M1 activates hip and trunk
muscles, while more lateral M1 activates muscles Figure 10.6 Topographical organization of the
of the face. motor cortex (top), showing that neurons that
Penfield discovered that within the motor control adjacent body parts are often adjacent
cortex, different muscle groups are laid out in a themselves. The motor homunculus (bottom) is
rough topography, meaning that neurons that a representation of how much motor cortex is
control the thumb are near other neurons that dedicated to control over a specific body part.
10-6
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Clinical connection: Prosthetic limbs
If activation of specific neurons can
produce muscle activity, then decoding
these descending signals could be used
to help amputees control their prosthetic
limbs. This technology is called a brain-
machine interface. In a technique called an
electrocorticogram (eCoG), the surgeon
puts a high-density electrode array capable
of sensing neural activity directly onto the
surface of the cortex of M1. With this strategy,
it is possible to detect electrical activity at
high spatial resolution (hundreds of microns)
and temporal resolution (hundreds of
microseconds), which is critical for movements
as precise and rapid as muscle movement. Figure 10.7 An eCoG allows a machine
ECoG grids have already been successfully to read cortical electrical activity with high
implanted in people with tetraplegia, allowing temporal and spatial precision, which can be
them to control external devices such as a used to control prosthetic limbs.
cursor on a screen or a prosthetic limb.
In the early 2000s, researchers experiments, the researchers delivered long
discovered that complex preprogrammed stimulation trains, similar in duration to that
actions, such as opening the mouth and observed in large muscle group movement
bringing a hand to the mouth, could be - approximately a half a second or longer.
activated from a single parcel of brain Further experiments developed a gestural
regardless of where the hand was located map, and even more complex behaviors such
in space - on your knee, on the table in front as reaching, climbing, and defensive postures.
of you, or to the side, for example. In these
Sensory feedback object, you could do it reasonably well without
An important component of healthy visual feedback. In order to make an accurate
movement is somatosensation, the process of movement, the brain needs to know how well
sensing and perceiving the body (chapter 8.) One the actual movement matches the intended
aspect is proprioception, the perception of our movement. If you are making an error, the sooner
body in the world. For example, if you close your it is discovered, the sooner you can update your
eyes, you can still feel if you are slouching and movement plan and adjust the movement.
if your hands are in front of you or to your sides. Receptors in our muscles, tendons,
Even if you were to move your arms forward, joints, and skin detect contraction, stretch,
such as when reaching out to grab a nearby and vibration. Sensory neurons carrying this
10-7
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

information synapse onto neurons in the spinal
cord, sending sensory information to both motor
neurons and also up to the brain, particularly the
primary somatosensory cortex (or S1; chapter
8). Here, several bidirectional connections are
made onto neurons in the adjacent motor cortex.
Through these signaling communication routes,
sensory information is used to update the motor
commands and correct movements that go awry.
10-8
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

10.2 Modifiers of Descending Information
Although the descending signals from Since the time of Galen in Ancient Greece
M1 are the major motor command signals that (~200 CE), behavioral functions related to
regulate activity, that signal is fine tuned through sensorimotor control have been ascribed to the
the action of two major brain structures, the cerebellum. In 1824, Marie-Jean-Pierre Flourens
cerebellum and a series of nuclei called the basal demonstrated that pigeons with cerebellar
ganglia. damage have poor wing flap coordination,
resulting in a diminished ability to fly. Anatomist
The Cerebellum Jan Evangelista Purkynĕ (1787–1869) described
The cerebellum (“little brain” in Latin) is the major output cell of the cerebellar cortex,
the most prominent structure of the hindbrain, and histological studies conducted by Santiago
located at the ventral-most part of the brain. The Ramon y Cajal (1909) later described cell
structure is evolutionarily ancient, and the general morphology and the layers of the cerebellum.
architecture and cell types of the cerebellum are The idea that cerebellum is key for
conserved between teleost fish and mammals. coordinated movement remains central to
The human cerebellum contains 69 billion cerebellar research. Cerebellum plays a role
neurons, which represents 80% of the total in integrating sensory information to produce
number of neurons in the human brain, despite coordinated movement, refining motor-related
being physically only 10% of the total brain mass. outputs to learn motor tasks, and processing
cognitive and executive functions.
Nonmotor functions of cerebellar circuits
have not received significant attention until recent
years. Stimulation or lesion of deep cerebellar
nuclei produced various autonomic and complex
Figure 10.8 The cerebellum is relatively small, Figure 10.9 Early illustration by Ramon y Cajal
but contains more neurons than the rest of the of the different types of neurons found in the
brain. cerebellum.
10-9
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

behavioral outputs, and associative learning organization with different regions of the
occurs in the cerebellum. Cerebellar abnormalities cerebellum receiving afferent fibers from different
like Purkinje cell loss may be involved in autism. sensory systems and projecting to different motor
Furthermore, cerebellar cognitive affective systems.
syndrome (CCAS) is characterized by dysfunction The surface of the cerebellum has a series
in executive tasks (e.g. planning, working memory, of parallel folds called lobules. Two transverse
abstract reasoning), impaired visual-spatial fissures, the primary fissure and the posterolateral
memory, changes to personality and emotional fissure, divide the cerebellum into three lobes.
control, and problems with language production, On the dorsal surface, the primary fissure
demonstrating that cerebellum contributes to separates the anterior and posterior lobes, while
much more than just motor related behaviors. on the ventral surface, the posterolateral fissure
separates the body of the cerebellum from the
Anatomy and function of the cerebellum flocculonodular lobe. The midline region is called
The cerebellum is composed of an external the vermis (Latin for “worm”), and on either side
layer of gray matter (the cerebellar cortex), an of the vermis is a cerebellar hemisphere.
internal core of white matter, and three pairs of Functionally, the cerebellum can be
deep nuclei (the fastigial nucleus, the interposed divided into three defined regions with roles in
nuclei, and the dentate nucleus). The cerebellum distinct types of movement.
is connected to the dorsal brain stem by three
pairs of peduncles, or stalks of tissue: the
inferior cerebellar peduncle, the middle cerebellar
peduncle, and the superior cerebellar peduncle.
The cerebellum is organized in a series
of regular, repeating units. It has a somatotopic
Cerebellar
hemisphere Vermis
Primary fissure Anterior lobe
Posterior lobe
Posterolateral Flocculonodular
fissure lobe
Figure 10.11 A midsagittal view of the cerebellum
Figure 10.10 The cerebellum is attached to the (top) and an “unrolled” view (bottom) labeling the
brain stem via three large pairs of nerve fibers. major anatomical structures.
10-10
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

1. The vestibulocerebellum, composed of the joint and muscle somatosensory information,
flocculonodular lobe, is the most evolutionarily providing the cerebellum with sensory feedback
-conserved region of the cerebellum. It integrates related to both voluntary and involuntary
visual and vestibular inputs, relaying information movement.
about head and body position in space. It can be The ventral spinocerebellar tract is only
thought of as two components, a medial aspect active during voluntary movements. It sends
and a lateral aspect. a “copy” of spinal motor neuron activity to the
Medial vestibulocerebellum controls cerebellum, informing the movement commands
muscles of the trunk and head, which regulate assembled at the spinal cord level.
posture. It also communicates with the limb Together, these spinocerebellar
extensor muscles, which help maintain balance connections are important for motor learning.
at rest and during locomotion. Sensory information from the actual movement
Lateral vestibulocerebellum controls (dorsal) is compared with the expected
eye movements and coordinates head and eye movement (ventral). If there is a mismatch, the
movements. In clinical observations, patients with motor command gets modification to achieve the
lesions in the lateral vestibulocerebellum display desired output.
deficits in smooth pursuit eye movement towards The cerebellum also initiates feed-forward
the side with the lesion. control of muscle activity to regulate the timing
of movements. This is anticipatory activity that
2. The spinocerebellum, which includes causes muscle contractions to generate smooth
the vermis and intermediate regions of the and accurate motion.
hemispheres, receives somatosensory and
proprioceptive inputs from the spinal cord and is 3. The cerebrocerebellum, composed of the
important for locomotion and extremity movement. lateral portions of the cerebellar hemispheres, is
The distal muscles of the limbs and digits are the most evolutionarily recent region, and is much
controlled by neurons in the intermediate regions larger in humans and apes than other basal-order
of the cerebellar hemispheres that receive mammals. As the name implies, these structures
somatosensory inputs from the limb.
Somatosensory information (touch, Spinocerebellum
pressure, proprioception; chapter 8) is passed to
the spinocerebellum from the spinal cord. These Cerebrocerebellum
connections provide feedback to the organism
about its changing position and environment
so that comparisons and adjustments can be
made. Projections into the spinocerebellum
display approximate somatotopy. There are two
functionally distinct ascending pathways into
Vestibulocerebellum
spinocerebellum, both carrying information from
spinal interneurons. Figure 10.12 Functional divisions of the
The dorsal spinocerebellar tract carries cerebellum.
10-11
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Clinical connection: Ataxia
Ataxia is a condition characterized by
poor coordination of voluntary movements,
atypical eye movements, poor balance, or
changes in gait. They may exhibit dysarthria,
a speech disorder resulting in difficulty with
articulating language. Acute alcohol intoxication
produces an approximation of the symptoms of
ataxia. Figure 10.12 MRI showing a healthy cerebellum
A wide variety of causes can result in (left) and one experiencing degeneration from
ataxia, such as cerebellar injury from a stroke ataxia (right).
or tumor, toxin exposure, radiation poisoning,
hereditary diseases, or diet-induced (gluten) cause is addressed, and may be completely
autoimmune mediate cell death. Treatment of reversible or untreatable. Medication and physical
ataxia is most effective when the underlying therapy may also help treat the symptoms.
communicate with the cerebral cortex. Outputs Lugaro cells and chandelier cells) as well as
of the cerebrocerebellum travel to motor and excitatory interneurons (unipolar brush cells).
premotor cortices, and function in planning and Mossy fibers, one of the two major types of
executing movement. The cerebrocerebellum afferent projections into the cerebellum, terminate
also targets nonmotor associative areas, such in the granular layer. Mossy fibers form synaptic
as prefrontal and posterior parietal cortex, complexes with granule cells and Golgi cells called
contributing to cognitive functions. Neuroimaging cerebellar glomeruli that allow neurotransmitter
and neuropsychological studies demonstrate spillover and crosstalk.
cerebellar activation during tasks designed to The middle layer is called the Purkinje
evaluate attention, planning, working memory, cell layer and constitutes the output layer of the
abstract reasoning, language, pain, emotion and cerebellar cortex. It consists of a single layer of
addiction. Purkinje cells, which have giant cell bodies and
a broad dendritic arbor that stems from a central
Cellular organization of the cerebellum dendrite and fans in a single plane, extending
The cerebellar cortex is arranged into upward into the outer layer of the cerebellar
three layers with distinct populations of neurons. cortex. Purkinje cell axons are responsible for the
The deepest layer, called the granular output of the cerebellar cortex, projecting to deep
layer, is the input layer of the cerebellar cortex. It cerebellar nuclei in the white matter or vestibular
contains a substantial number of small, densely nuclei in the brain stem where GABA is released.
packed excitatory neurons called granule The external layer of the cerebellar cortex
cells, which are the primary unit of this layer. is the molecular layer, which contains the apical
The granular layer also includes more sparsely dendrites of the Purkinje cells and parallel fibers,
distributed inhibitory interneurons (Golgi cells, the axons of granule cells. These parallel fibers
10-12
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Cerebellar
glomerus
Figure 10.14 Cartoon illustrating the cellular organization of the neurons of the cerebellum.
ascend from the granular layer to the molecular Also in the molecular layer are two populations
layer where they bifurcate to form branches that of inhibitory interneurons, the stellate cells
extend mediolaterally, parallel to the long axis and basket cells, which provide feed-forward
of the folia/lobules, thus giving them their name. inhibition to Purkinje cells.
10-13
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

The Basal Ganglia Diseases of the basal ganglia include
The basal ganglia are a series of subcortical movement disorders such as Parkinson’s disease,
brain structures that are intimately involved with dystonia, Huntington’s disease, and Tourette’s, as
various aspects of movement, such as voluntary well as complex psychiatric disorders including
motor activity, habit learning, and the selection of addiction and obsessive-compulsive disorder
actions. Despite being major structures involved (OCD).
in motor functions, none of the components of
the basal ganglia directly send projections down Striatum
the spinal cord. Rather, they communicate mostly The striatum is the largest of the basal
within themselves before signaling through the ganglia structures. It is the main input site of the
motor cortex. While the connections between basal ganglia, with projections coming from both
basal ganglia structures have been largely cortical and limbic structures such as thalamus
mapped out, the specific functions of each and amygdala.
individual structure in isolation is not entirely On a cellular level, the majority of neurons
clear. in the striatum are GABAergic cells called spiny
projection neurons (SPNs), or medium spiny
Cortex neurons (MSNs). These neurons express
different subtypes of dopamine receptors, and
some of them are excited by dopamine while
others are inhibited. Mixed within the SPNs are
Striatum
several populations of interneurons with various
GPe
STN
GPi
SNpr
SNpc
Thalamus
Dopamine GABA Glutamate
Figure 10.15 Diagram showing the connectivity Figure 10.16 Confocal image of a striatal spiny
and the nature of the signaling between different projection neuron identified with green fluorescent
nuclei of the basal ganglia. protein (GFP).
10-14
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

electrophysiological properties that utilize
different neurotransmitter systems, such as
GABA, acetylcholine, and nitric oxide.
The striatum is divided into two anatomically
and functionally different structures, a dorsal and
ventral striatum.
Dorsal Striatum
The dorsal striatum is made up of two
components, the caudate nucleus and putamen.
In rodents, the two are indistinguishable.
Functionally, dorsal striatum contributes to
learning of habitual behaviors. Habits are learned
motor patterns that can be performed without full
attention and generally inflexible due to repeated
training. Habits can either be adaptive (such as
changing physical stance in response to different Figure 10.17 Skinner box can be used to measure
environmental threats) or maladaptive (such operant conditioning, a dorsal striatum-mediated
as compulsive hair pulling or in substance use behavior.
disorder).
An example of a behavioral test of habit Putamen contributes to motor-associated
learning is a serial reaction time test, where one procedural learning tasks, like a mirror tracing
of four visual stimuli are presented and the patient task (chapter 13.1), which involves learning
is expected to make a motor response, such as how to draw with a pencil while watching only a
pushing on a corresponding button. If the pattern reflection of your hand. As with the serial reaction
of stimuli repeat with some regularity (button 2 is time test, improving at these behaviors happens
often followed by button 4, for example) patients unconsciously.
can unconsciously learn the repetition of the Anatomically, the dorsal striatum receives
pattern, decreasing reaction time. excitatory glutamatergic inputs from both
The caudate is particularly important motor cortex and thalamus. It also receives
for goal-directed actions, which are sets of dopaminergic projections from another basal
motor behaviors that are made in response ganglia structure, the substantia nigra pars
to knowledge of which actions lead to which compacta, a communication route called the
outcomes. such as the complex motor actions nigrostriatal pathway.
made while performing an operant conditioning The only output of the dorsal striatum
task. An experimental paradigm for this behavior are the GABAergic spiny projection neurons
would be a Skinner box, where an animal lever- (SPNs), which exist in two different types with
presses or nose-pokes for a food or sugar reward two different targets. One population, the direct
(chapter 11.2). SPNs (dSPNs), express dopamine D1 receptors
and send axons into the internal globus
10-15
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

pallidus (GPi). When this direct pathway is imbalance of this signaling (such as in Parkinson’s
activated, it increases motor activity. The other disease) leads to motor disturbances.
output neurons, the indirect SPNs (iSPNs),
express dopamine D2 receptors and project into Ventral Striatum
the external globus pallidus (GPe). Activation The ventral striatum includes the olfactory
of this indirect pathway decreases motor activity. tubercule and the nucleus accumbens, which
For healthy behavioral output, the dSPNs is further subdivided into core and shell.
drive the intended motor action, while the iSPNs Importantly, these ventral striatum
shut down competing motor actions. The balance structures are important for reward, motivation,
of these systems is closely regulated, and and aversion. As with dorsal striatum, dopamine
Clinical connection: Huntington’s Disease
Huntington’s disease is a rare Huntington’s disease passed through
neurodegenerative movement disorder resulting families in an autosomal dominant manner. A
from various dysfunctional signaling pathways protein called huntingtin (htt) is implicated, and
of the basal ganglia. Symptoms include mutant huntingtin has several repeats of the
hyperkinesia (uncontrolled movement), poor amino acid glutamine. The greater the number of
coordination, and cognitive and psychiatric repeats, the more severe the symptoms and the
changes eventually leading to dementia. The earlier the onset of the disease. A leading theory
onset of symptoms happens when a person suggests that mutant htt accumulates inside
is in their 30s-50s, and prognosis is generally neurons, leading to neurodegeneration.
fatal within 15 years after diagnosis. There is
currently no cure for the disease.
Normal Htt protein
Healthy Htt gene
10-26 repeats CAGCAGCAG...
CAGCAGCAGCAGCAGCAG...
Abnormal Htt
protein
HD gene
37-80 repeats
Figure 10.18 Longer CAG repeats in the Htt gene code for abnormal proteins. Greater number of
repeats are associated with earlier age of onset of symptom presentation.
10-16
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

signaling is critical for mediating these behaviors. functionally different connections. The internal
Increased dopamine signaling in ventral striatum globus pallidus (GPi) is movement promoting,
is a “learning signal” that encourages the organism and receives inputs from the dSPNs of the dorsal
to repeat that behavior again. Dopamine is striatum. On the other hand, the external globus
released in response to unexpected rewarding pallidus (GPe) is movement inhibiting, and
stimuli, such as getting a sip of a sugary drink or receives dorsal striatal afferents from iSPNs.
engaging in sexual contact. Many drugs of abuse,
such as nicotine and cocaine, artificially drive up Subthalamic Nucleus (STN)
this dopamine signal, which leads to repeated The STN is part of the indirect pathway,
use and drug seeking (chapter 11). downstream of the GPe. The GPe makes up the
The major inputs into the ventral striatum axonal inputs into the STN, which are inhibitory
are glutamatergic afferents from prefrontal GABAergic projections. The output of the STN
cortex and limbic areas, such as hippocampus, are glutamatergic signals into the GPi.
amygdala, and thalamus. The dopaminergic In a medical intervention called deep
inputs come from the ventral tegmental area in brain stimulation (DBS), a surgeon implants
the midbrain. permanently indwelling electrodes directly into
brain tissue. These electrodes are controlled
Globus Pallidus (GP) by an external battery pack that delivers pre-
In dissection, the GP appears as a pale programmed stimulation protocols. DBS in
globe. It is subdivided into two components with the STN is used to alleviate the symptoms of
Parkinson’s disease.
Electrode
Battery
Figure 10.19 A deep brain stimulator (left) is controlled by an external battery. During surgery, the STN
(right) can be targeted as a treatment for Parkinson’s disease.
10-17
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Substantia Nigra significance, these neurons experience selective
The SN is a midbrain structure that appears neurodegeneration in Parkinson’s disease.
darker in dissection due to heavy expression of The substantia nigra pars reticulata
neuromelanin across cells in these areas. It is the (SNpr) is an anatomically distinct area of the SN.
largest midbrain structure. It receives GABA-ergic inputs from the dorsal
SN is divided into two areas. The striatum and excitatory inputs from STN. The
substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) major output of SNpr is GABAergic; these axons
contains several dopamine expressing neurons terminate in the thalamus
that project into the dorsal striatum. Of clinical
Clinical connection: Parkinson’s Disease percentage of cases are early onset (21 - 50
Parkinson’s disease is a years old; Michael J. Fox was diagnosed at
neurodegenerative movement disorder that 30), and have a strong genetic component. The
causes bradykinesia (slowness of movement), disease causes significant decreases in life
a resting tremor, muscle rigidity, and changes expectancy and quality of life.
to posture and locomotion. Although most A loss of dopaminergic neurons of the
symptoms are motor, there are mild cognitive SNpc contributes to basal ganglia circuitry
and psychiatric changes, such as apathy, disruption. When less dopamine is released
anhedonia, mood disturbances, or depression. into dorsal striatum, the dSPNs are less active
Advanced age is the primary risk factor, as while the iSPNs are more active. This imbalance
an estimated 1% of people over the age of in the output leads to the motor symptoms of
60 develop PD. Other environmental factors the disease. However, the cause of PD is still
contribute to risk, such as repeated traumatic unknown; the formation of intracellular protein
brain injury (suspected in Muhammad Ali) aggregates called Lewy bodies and oxidative
or occupational exposure to heavy metals, stress leading to neurodegeneration are among
insecticides, or other neurotoxins. A small some of the proposed mechanisms.
Healthy midbrain
Substantia nigra
Parkinson’s midbrain
Figure 10.20 The substantia nigra selectively degrades in PD (left), possibly due to accumulation
of Lewy bodies inside the neurons (right, arrow head).
10-18
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

10.3 The Spinal Cord
Spinal cord anatomy several cranial nerves, particularly those with
The spinal cord extends posteriorly from motor function: The trigeminal nucleus (CN
the brain stem, surrounded by the vertebrae. In V) modulates muscles of chewing, the facial
a typical human, the spinal cord is about 1 cm nucleus (CN VII) regulates facial expressions,
in diameter. Generally, the diameter of the spinal the glossopharyngeal nucleus (CN IX) controls
cord decreases from anterior to posterior, with two the muscles involved in speech and swallowing,
exceptions: an enlargement in the mid-cervical and the hypoglossal nucleus (CN XII) controls
region to accommodate the extra nerves of the the muscles of the tongue.
arms and hands, and a smaller enlargement in
Corticobulbar tract
the lumbar region to accommodate extra nerves
Upper motor
of the legs and feet (chapter 2.1). neuron
The output neurons of the motor cortex
Cranial nerve
carry voluntary motor information and send
motor nuclei
their axons down through two major descending
communication routes. At the level of the
brain stem, both pass through the medullary
pyramids, paired anatomical structures found
on the ventral surface of the medulla. Because
of this, both descending axonal tracts are also
called the pyramidal tracts.
The corticobulbar tract is made up of
axons that terminate in various brain stem motor
nuclei. These nuclei communicate directly with
Figure 10.22 The corticobulbar tract originates in
M1 and projects into the brain stem motor cranial
nerve nuclei that control facial muscles.
The other major output of M1 are the
upper motor neurons whose axons are the
corticospinal tract, which runs down the spinal
cord through white matter. This pathway has two
different communication components.
Figure 10.21 Position of the pyramids in the
Upwards of 90% of the corticospinal tract
ventral spinal cord (left, green) and its location
are axons of the lateral corticospinal tract, which
along the midline (right).
sends voluntary motor control to the contralateral
10-19
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

distal limbs, such as in the arms, hands, legs, neurons then send nerve rootlets out of the
and feet. Some neurons of M1 are Betz cells, ventral surface of the spinal cord, then form a
the largest known neurons in the brain. Most of neuromuscular junction with the muscles.
this tract crosses hemispheres at the pyramidal The remaining output is the anterior
decussation, runs down the contralateral spinal corticospinal tract, which carries information to
cord, then forms synapses onto the lower motor the muscles of the trunk, such as our shoulders
neurons in the ventral horn. These lower motor or pectorals. This signaling from the brain stem
descends ipsilaterally, but eventually decussates
Primary at the spinal cord, resulting in contralateral control.
motor Here, as above, the neuron forms synapses with
cortex
the lower motor neurons found in the ventral horn.
Reflexes
Reflexes are involuntary motor
responses that are performed automatically and
independent of brain signals (although some
can be suppressed voluntarily, with extra effort).
Reflexes involve very simple circuits, sometimes
consisting of only two populations of neurons:
Midbrain Sensory information comes in from the periphery,
synapsing onto motor neurons in the brainstem
or spinal cord. Reflexes can take place as quickly
as 1/100th of a second!
A simple reflex is the patellar reflex, or
Medulla
the “knee-jerk” or myotatic reflex (described
Pyramids in more depth in chapter 8; figure 8.27). The
stretching of the tendon causes the muscle to
elongate, sensory receptors detect this change
Pyramidal
decussation in muscle length, and the corresponding signal
Anterior
is sent into the spinal cord. This sensory neuron
corticospinal
synapses directly onto a motoneuron, which then
Lateral tract
corticospinal tells the thigh muscle to contract, making the
Spinal cord
tract
kicking “knee-jerk” movement. Since only one
decussation
To muscle synapse is involved in producing this response,
this is an example of a monosynaptic reflex arc.
Spinal cord
The reflexive kick is controlled at the level
Lower motor
of the spinal cord and cannot be intentionally
neuron
suppressed by descending motor pathways no
Figure 10.23 Connectivity of descending motor matter how hard you concentrate.
control pathways.
10-20
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Central pattern generators (CPG) muscles through CPG activation is likely an
Central pattern generators (CPGs) are evolutionary older mechanism. Respiratory
networks of cells that are capable of producing control circuits are found at the level of the brain
intrinsic motor responses even in the absence of stem, specifically, the medulla and pons. One
sensory or brain inputs. These motor responses suspected CPG is a population of medullary
are usually well-rehearsed, repetitive, and cells called the pre-Bötzinger complex, which
happen at the unconscious level, meaning that contains cells that change their activity in a cyclic
certain behavioral outputs can be performed pattern. Neurons in these areas are also sensitive
independently of signals upstream in the to changes in blood chemistry (Chapter 9.3).
motor cortex. Some example motor responses The major nerves involved with respiration
driven by CPGs include diaphragm movement are the phrenic nerve, which innervates the
(respiration), alternating leg swinging and foot diaphragm, and the intercostal nerves, which
flexing (walking), and the progressive contraction predictably innervate the intercostal muscles.
of up to 25 pairs of muscles in the tongue and When we inhale (inspiration), the diaphragm
mouth (swallowing). Some CPGs are located in contracts and the intercostals move the rib cage
the brain stem (respiration) and others throughout to increase the volume of the chest cavity, which
the spinal cord (locomotion). allows the lungs to expand. During exhalation,
CPGs have been observed in several the reverse process is true. These nerves receive
organisms, ranging from insects, crayfish, birds, innervation from neurons of the CPGs in the
and mammals including humans, hinting that respiratory centers of the hindbrain (medulla and
their evolution was highly adaptive for survival. pons, specifically.)
Imagine how difficult it would be to survive if every The activity of the respiratory CPGs is so
breath required a conscious thought! potent, that they can sometimes function while
The CPG is not a standalone driver of unconscious. Some deficits in respiratory CPGs
motor activity, however. The circuits receive are believed to be one cause of central sleep
signals from higher brain areas which can modify apnea, a disorder where a person stops breathing
their characteristics. Imagine that you want to while asleep (chapter 12).
consciously hold your breath, or intentionally walk
in some unusual or goofy way. In both cases, CPGs of locomotion
the descending signals from the brain are able It is much more complex to describe the
to override the output motor command pattern action of the muscle groups needed for a simple
that the CPG normally produces. Once you stop behavior of just walking down the sidewalk: the
intentionally changing your motor behavior, the ankle dorsiflexors, the hamstrings, hip flexors,
muscles return to their normal activity in response gluteus maximus and many more function at
to CPG output. very precise moments, allowing us to propel
ourselves forward. Importantly, this pattern of
CPGs of respiration activity is rhythmic, and repeats at the frequency
Getting oxygen is one of the most essential of stepping.
functions that an animal needs to perform for Many earlier studies of spinal cord CPGs
survival. As such, involuntary control of respiratory were conducted in different animal groups with
10-21
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

the following years, he gradually
recovered a small amount of function.
Fine manipulation skills and bladder
bowel control never recovered, and
he had not walked unassisted for
ten years, experiencing tremendous
weakness after taking a few steps.
Just days after beginning a
physical therapy regimen consisting
of assisted upright walking, upon lying
down, the man reported alternating
muscle flexion and relaxation of the
hips, knees, and ankles similar to the
pattern of activity seen in locomotion.
He was unable to voluntarily stop
Figure 10.24 Locomotor CPGs produce alternating cyclic these motions, and could only get
activity of motor neurons, which simplify walking. some rest by turning to the side.
This muscle activity was smooth and
unique locomotor patterns. Mollusks have rhythmic, as would be seen in a healthy person
crawling activity that is rhythmic, fish swim by walking.
sending alternative patterns of muscle activity
through their body, and birds fly by rhythmic
flapping of their wings.
In mammals, spinal CPGs were
demonstrated in cats with a thoracic-level
Walking Running
spinal cord transection. Following this surgery,
the signals from the brain were unable to be Figure 10.25 Six-legged animals like insects
communicated down to the hind legs, eliminating have central pattern generators that simplify
voluntary movement. They exhibited weakened locomotion through coordinated neural activity
muscular power, but were still able to stand for that regulates muscle movement.
short times. If their front paws were put onto a
stable platform while their hindlegs were put on a
moving treadmill, the cat would involuntarily walk
to keep up.
Humans also have CPGs for movement.
One remarkable study looked at 37-year-old
man who had injured his spinal cord in a football
accident as a young man. His injury was at the
level of C5, resulting in complete paralysis and
a loss of sensation from the neck down. Over
10-22
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

10.4 The Muscles
Neuromuscular junction (NMJ) The axons of the lower motor neurons
The signal from lower motor neurons synthesize and release acetylcholine. Densely
communicate with the muscle at the expressed in the sarcolemma are nicotinic
neuromuscular junction (NMJ). The NMJ is acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs), ionotropic
similar to other chemical synapses, however receptors that allow sodium influx and subsequent
the postsynaptic cell is a muscle cell separated muscle cell depolarization upon acetylcholine
by about 30 nm. The postsynaptic site is the binding. This depolarization results in muscle cell
sarcolemma, the cell membrane of muscle cells, contraction.
which has several folds to increase surface area.
Muscle anatomy
As mentioned above, motor functions can
either be voluntary (moving your arm above your
head) or involuntary (muscle contraction that leads
to bowel motility, or heart beating). Although the
nervous system influences both types of muscle
activity, most of our discussion revolves around
deliberate, voluntary skeletal muscle movement.
The main action of muscles is to contract, a
physical change of their shape where they
become wider and shorter. For example, as you
1
flex your arm, your bicep changes from long and
thin to short and thick.
2 Different muscles have different
characteristics driven by their shape and
3
composition. For example, some muscles can
be active for a long time without getting tired
4
(maintaining your posture in your chair as you
read this) while others can exert a lot of force but
5
get tired quickly (lifting weights in the gym).
In studying muscles, some of the key
Figure 10.26 Electron micrograph image of an measurements are where they connect to the
NMJ (top; T = axon terminal, M = muscle cell). bone, how long they are, how thick they are,
Cartoon depicting the phases of signaling at an and what type of muscle fibers they are made of.
NMJ (bottom). The action potential (1) allows These measurements can be used to calculate
release of aceylcholine (2), activating nAChRs how much force a muscle can generate and how
(3), allowing depolarization of muscle cells (4) quickly the joint can move.
and the contraction (5).
10-23
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Individual muscles, such as your
Clinical connection: Myasthenia
biceps brachii, are made up of several muscle
gravis (MG)
fascicles, which in turn are made up of muscle
Myasthenia gravis (MG) is an autoimmune
fibers. Muscle fibers are the individual cells in
disorder characterized by muscle weakness,
which contraction occurs. The functional units
resulting in difficulty with speech, trouble with
for contraction are called sarcomeres. It is the
movement and swallowing, drooping eyelids,
aggregated activity of hundreds of thousands
and double vision. Each year, an estimated 20
of sarcomeres within each muscle fiber that
out of a million people get diagnosed with MG.
generates the force with which you walk your
The muscle weakness seen in MG results
dog or chew your food.
from immune system-mediated destruction
The contraction within sarcomeres
of the nAChRs expressed at the NMJ. Thus,
happens between two proteins actin and
when the lower motor neuron releases ACh, the
myosin. Actin are the thin filaments that form
muscle cells are unable to detect this release,
the scaffolding, and myosin are thick filaments
so they fail to contract appropriately.
that pull the actin together, shortening the
One therapeutic strategy involves
sarcomere and contracting the muscle.
inhibition of acetylcholinesterase, the enzyme
Although each sarcomere is small (1.5 to 3.5
that degrades ACh. This causes the synaptic
µm), many are stacked back to back along the
ACh to remain in the synapse longer, increasing
length of each fiber, pulling against each other
the chance that receptors get activated.
to contract through the whole range of your
Alternatively, autoimmune diseases like MG can
joints. Many sarcomeres bundled in parallel
be improved with immunosuppressant therapy.
provide the combined force that give muscles
With successful treatment, MG usually does not
strength. The strength in all of your muscles
result in changes in lifespan.
comes from these tiny threads pulling against
each other.
Actin
Myosin
Relaxed
Flexed
Figure 10.27 A patient with MG may show
weakness of facial muscles. Figure 10.28 In a sarcomere, myosin (purple)
and actin (red) overlap when the muscle flexes.
10-24
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Muscle types
There are two key characteristics of voluntarily contracted (and in reflexes) to move
muscles: their structure (striated due to the your body by moving your skeleton. There are
presence of sarcomeres or smooth), and whether two types of skeletal muscles.
they can be voluntarily controlled. Based on these Fast twitch muscles generate a lot of
characteristics, there are three types of muscles force quickly, but also tire quickly. They are used
in humans and other vertebrates. mostly in high intensity exercise like lifting weights
and sprinting. Slow twitch muscles generate
Striated Smooth less force, but can work for a long time. They are
Voluntary Skeletal used in endurance exercise like jogging. Many
Involuntary Cardiac Smooth exercises use a combination of both.
Muscles come in several different shapes,
Skeletal muscle is what most people defined by the arrangement of their fibers and how
think of when they think “muscle.” They attach they connect to tendons. The different shapes
to bones with tendons, and exert force on your allow for different properties: some can change
skeleton to create movement and exert force on length quickly, others change shape less but are
objects. stronger. Another consideration for shape is the
Skeletal muscles are also called “voluntary geometry of the joint they cover: for example, the
muscles” because they are the muscles that move pectoralis muscle reaches from your chest across
when you choose to make a movement. They are your shoulder, and so the muscle is wide and flat
Skeletal Cardiac Smooth
Figure 10.29 Different types of muscle as seen at 400x magnification. Muscle fibers are seen running
from left to right. In skeletal and cardiac muscles, striations can be seen perpendicular to the muscle
fibers.
10-25
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

where it connects to your sternum, and narrows at the elbow. It’s movement is supported by
to a point where it connects to your upper arm. synergistic muscles, including the brachialis
Skeletal muscles work to move the body and brachioradialis. These can also be fixators,
through a combination of cooperation and providing stability and preventing or allowing
opposition. The agonist muscle is the main rotation of the wrist while flexing at the elbow.
mover, like the biceps brachii when you flex Antagonist muscles are those that move in
the opposite direction to the agonist. For the
elbow, the antagonist is the triceps bracii, which
Bicep contract
lengthens during the bicep flex. Another example
Bicep relax
of an agonist-antagonist pair are the hamstrings
to flex the leg, and the quadriceps to extend it.
Smooth muscles are the muscles
Tricep
Tricep relax contract embedded within organs like your stomach and
intestines, blood vessels, and bladder. They are
also known as “involuntary” muscles because
they are not under direct conscious control.
Cardiac muscle can be thought of as a
Figure 10.30 Skeletal muscles may be paired and hybrid between skeletal muscles and smooth
produce opposing effects on a particular motion. muscles, in that they are striated like skeletal
muscles but not under conscious control.
The Open Neuroscience Initiative is funded by a grant from the Vincentian Endowment Fund of
DePaul University.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International License.
10-26
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Cover: https://pixabay.com/photos/agility-ballet-dancing-athlete-1850711/
10.1 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Prefrontal_cortex_(left)_-_anterior_view.png https://commons.wikimedia.org/
wiki/File:Prefrontal_cortex_(left)_-_lateral_view.png
10.2 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:WisconsinCardSort.png modified by Austin Lim
10.3 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Posterior_Parietal_Lobe.jpg
10.4 Suzuki W, Banno T, Miyakawa N, Abe H, Goda N and Ichinohe N (2015) Mirror Neurons in a New World Monkey,
Common Marmoset. Front. Neurosci. 9:459. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2015.00459
10.5 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:UMN_vs_LMN.png
10.6 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sensory_and_motor_homunculi.jpg
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Figure_35_03_04.jpg
10.7 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Intracranial_electrode_grid_for_electrocorticography.png
10.8 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Posterior_lobe_of_cerebellum_--_04.png
10.9 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:CajalCerebellum.jpg
10.10 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Gray705.png
10.11 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:CerebellumDiv.png modified by Austin Lim https://commons.wikimedia.org/
wiki/File:1613_Major_Regions_of_the_Cerebellum-02.jpg modified by Austin Lim
10.12 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:CerebellumDiv.png modified by Austin Lim
10.13 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Brain_chrischan.jpg https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ataxia.jpg
10.14 Consalez GG, Goldowitz D, Casoni F and Hawkes R (2021) Origins, Development, and Compartmentation of the
Granule Cells of the Cerebellum. Front. Neural Circuits 14:611841. doi: 10.3389/fncir.2020.611841
10.15 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Basal-ganglia-2.jpg modified by Austin Lim
10.16 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Confocal_image_of_spiny_neuron_-_1.jpg
10.17 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Skinner%27s_box.jpg
10.18 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Huntington%27s_disease_(5880985560).jpg modified by Austin Lim
10.19 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Typical_deep_brain_stimulation_setup.jpg modified by Austin Lim
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Deep_brain_stimulation_electrode_placement_reconstruction.png
10.20 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pathophysiology_of_Parkinson%27s_disease#/media/File:Blausen_0704_
ParkinsonsDisease.png Blausen.com staff (2014). “Medical gallery of Blausen Medical 2014”. WikiJournal of Medicine 1
(2). DOI:10.15347/wjm/2014.010. ISSN 2002-4436. - Own work
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Lewy_body_in_the_substantia_nigra_from_a_person_with_Parkinson%27s_
disease.jpg
10.21 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Pyramid_(medulla_oblongata)_-_lateral_view.png https://commons.
wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Gray679.png
10.22 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Motor_Facial_Route.png Patrick J. Lynch; illustrator; C. Carl Jaffe; MD;
cardiologist Yale University Center for Advanced Instructional Media Medical Illustrations by Patrick Lynch, generated for
multimedia teaching projects by the Yale University School of Medicine, Center for Advanced Instructional Media, 1987-
2000. Patrick J. Lynch, http://patricklynch.net. Modified by Austin Lim
10.23 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:1426_Corticospinal_Pathway.jpg modified by Austin Lim
10.24 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Cpg_output.jpg
10.25 Espinal A, Rostro-Gonzalez H, Carpio M, Guerra-Hernandez EI, Ornelas-Rodriguez M and Sotelo-Figueroa M (2016)
Design of Spiking Central Pattern Generators for Multiple Locomotion Gaits in Hexapod Robots by Christiansen Grammar
Evolution. Front. Neurorobot. 10:6. doi: 10.3389/fnbot.2016.00006
10.26 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Electron_micrograph_of_neuromuscular_junction_(cross-section).jpg
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:The_Muscle_Contraction_Process.png Modified by Austin Lim
10.27 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Myasthenia_Gravis.jpg
10.28 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sarcomere_relaxed_contracted.PNG
10.29 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Skeletal_muscle_400x.jpg https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Cardiac_
muscle_histology_400x.jpg
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Smooth_muscle_400x.jpg
10.30 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Animation_triceps_biceps.gif Modified by Austin Lim
10-27
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com



