C H A P T E R
3
Ionic gradients, membrane potential
and ionic currents
The neuronal plasma membrane delimits the whole electrical signalling in the nervous system. Among the ions
neuron, cell body, dendrites, dendritic spines, axon present in the nervous system fluids,
Na(cid:2)
,
K(cid:2)
,
Ca2(cid:2)
and
(cid:3)
and axon terminals. It is a barrier between the intracel- Cl ions seem to be responsible for almost all of the action.
lular and extracellular environments. The general
structure of the neuronal plasma membrane is similar
to that of other plasma membranes. It is made up of 3.1 THERE IS AN UNEQUAL
proteins inserted in a lipid bilayer, forming as a whole DISTRIBUTION OF IONS ACROSS
a ‘fluid mosaic’ (Figure 3.1). However, insofar as there NEURONAL PLASMA MEMBRANE.
are functions that are exclusively neuronal, the neu- THE NOTION OF CONCENTRATION
ronal membrane differs from other plasma membranes GRADIENT
by the nature, density and spatial distribution of the
proteins of which it is composed.
3.1.1 The plasma membrane separates two
The presence of a large diversity of transmembrane
media of different ionic composition
proteins called ionic channels(or simply ‘channels’) char-
acterize the neuronal plasma membrane. They allow the Regardless of the animal’s environment (seawater,
(cid:2)
passive movement of ions across membranes and thus freshwater or air), potassium (K ) ions are the
Alpha-helix protein
Glycolipid
Oligosaccharide
side chain
Globular
Phospholipid protein
Hydrophobic
segment of
alpha-helix protein Cholesterol
FIGURE 3.1 Fluid mosaic.
Transmembrane proteins and lipids are kept together by non-covalent interactions (ionic and hydrophobic).
From dictionary.laborlawtalk.com/Plasma_membrane.
29

30
3. IONIC GRADIENTS, MEMBRANE POTENTIAL AND IONIC CURRENTS
cytosol act as second messengers and transduce elec-
(in mM) trical activity in neurons into biochemical events such
(in mM) [K(cid:2)] (cid:4) 3 as exocytosis.
Ca2(cid:2)
ions bound to cytosolic proteins or
[Na(cid:2)o
] (cid:4) 140 present in organelle stores are not active
Ca2(cid:2)
ions;
V m(cid:4)(cid:3)60 mV [ [K N(cid:2) a(cid:2)] i ](cid:4) (cid:4) 1 4 70 [ [C Cl a(cid:3) 2] (cid:2)oo ](cid:4) o (cid:4) 1 4 10 .5 onl Iy n ‘ sf pre ite e’ oC fa t2 h(cid:2) ei uo nn es qh ua av le d a is r to ril be. ution of ions across the
i plasma membrane, intracellular and extracellular
[Cl(cid:3)] (cid:4) 7
[Ca2(cid:2)i
](cid:4) 0.0001
media are neutral ionic solutions: in each medium, the
Proteini concentration of positive ions is equal to that of nega-
(cid:2) (cid:3) tive ions. According to Figure 3.2,
[Na(cid:2) ]e(cid:2) [K(cid:2) ]e(cid:2)2[Ca2(cid:2) ]e(cid:4)140(cid:2) 3(cid:2)(2(cid:5)1.5)
(cid:4)146mM and [Cl(cid:3) ]e(cid:4)146mM
Nucleus
[Na(cid:2) ] (cid:2) [K(cid:2) ] (cid:2)2[Ca2(cid:2) ] (cid:4)7(cid:2)140(cid:2)0.0002
i i i
Mitochondrion (cid:4)147mM but [Cl(cid:3) ] (cid:4)7mM
i
In the intracellular compartment, other anions than
chloride ions are present and compensate for the positive
charges. These anions are HCO
(cid:3)
, PO
2(cid:3)
, aminoacids,
3 4
Ca2(cid:2) store in proteins, nucleic acids, etc.…. Most of these anions are
endoplasmic organic anions that do not cross the membrane.
reticulum
3.1.2 The unequal distribution of ions across
the neuronal plasma membrane is kept
Plasma
constant by active transport of ions
membrane
ΔpH (cid:4) 1.4
[H(cid:2)] intermembrane > [H(cid:2)] matrix Adifference of concentration between two compart-
ments is called a ‘concentration gradient’. Measurements
FIGURE 3.2 There is an unequal distribution of ions across
of
Na(cid:2)
,
K(cid:2)
,
Ca2(cid:2)
and
Cl(cid:3)
concentrations have shown
neuronal plasma membranes. Membrane potential.
Idealized nerve cell (depicted as a sphere) with relative concentra- that concentration gradients for ions are constant in the
tions of intra- and extracellular ions. external and cytosolic compartments, at the macro-
scopic level, during the entire neuronal life.
At least two hypotheses can explain this constancy:
•
Na(cid:2)
,
K(cid:2)
,
Ca2(cid:2)
and
Cl(cid:3)
ions cannot cross the
predominant cations in the intracellular fluid and
(cid:2) plasma membrane: plasma membrane is imperme-
sodium (Na ) ions are the predominant cations in the
able to these inorganic ions. In that case, concentra-
extracellular fluid. The main anions of the intracellular
(cid:3) tion gradients need to be established only once in
fluid are organic molecules (P ): negatively charged
the lifetime.
amino acids (glutamate and aspartate), proteins, nucleic
• Plasma membrane is permeable to
Na(cid:2)
,
K(cid:2)
,
Ca2(cid:2)
acids, phosphates, etc… which have a large molecular
(cid:3)
and Cl ions but there are mechanisms that contin-
weight. In the extracellular fluid the predominant
(cid:3) uously re-establish the gradients and maintain con-
anions are chloride (Cl ) ions. A marked difference
between cytosolic and extracellular
Ca2(cid:2)
concentrations
stant the unequal distribution of ions.
is also observed (Figure 3.2). This has been tested experimentally by measuring
Spatial distribution of
Ca2(cid:2)
ions inside the cell ionic fluxes. When proteins are absent from a synthetic
deserves a more detailed description.
Ca2(cid:2)
ions are lipid bilayer, no movements of ions occur across this
present in the cytosol as ‘free’
Ca2(cid:2)
ions at a very low purely lipidic membrane. Owing to its central
concentration
(10(cid:3)8to 10(cid:3)7M)
and as bound
Ca2(cid:2)
ions hydrophobic region, the lipid bilayer has a low perme-
(bound to
Ca2(cid:2)
-binding proteins). They are also dis- ability to hydrophilic substances such as ions, water
tributed in organelles able to sequester calcium, which and polar molecules; i.e. the lipid bilayer is a barrier
include endoplasmic reticulum, calciosome and mito- for the diffusion of ions and most polar molecules.
chondria, where they constitute the intracellular
Ca2(cid:2)
The first demonstrations of ionic fluxes across
stores. Free intracellular
Ca2(cid:2)
ions present in the plasma membrane by Hodgkin and Keynes (1955) were

3.1 THERE IS AN UNEQUAL DISTRIBUTION OF IONS ACROSS NEURONAL PLASMA MEMBRANE 31
(a) DNP
100 0.2 mmol l(cid:3)1
(b)
interactions strongly stabilize transmembrane proteins
within the bilayer, thus preventing their extracellular
and cytoplasmic regions from flipping back and forth.
Ionic channels have a three-dimensional structure
that delimits an aqueous pore through which certain
ions can pass. They provide the ions with a passage
through the membrane (Appendix 3.2). Each channel
may be regarded as an excitable molecule as it is
specifically responsive to a stimulus and can be in at
least two different states: closed and open. Channel
opening, the switch from the closed to the open state, is
tightly controlled (Table 3.1) by:
• a change in the membrane potential – these are
voltage-gated channels;
• the binding of an extracellular ligand, such as a neu-
rotransmitter – these are ligand-gated channels, also
called receptor channels or ionotropic receptors;
1(cid:3)s
2(cid:3)mc-selom
p
(cid:2) (cid:2) based on the use of radioisotopes of K or Na ions.
Experiments were conducted on the isolated squid giant
axon. When this axon is immersed in a bath containing
50
a control concentration of radioactive
*Na(cid:2) (24Na(cid:2)
)
instead of cold Na(cid:2) (22Na(cid:2) ), *Na(cid:2) ions constantly 30
appear in the cytoplasm. This *Na(cid:2) influx is not affected 20
by dinitrophenol (DNP), a blocker of ATP synthesis in
mitochondria. It does not require energy expenditure. 10
This is passive transport. This result is in favour of the
second hypothesis and leads to the following question: 5
what are the mechanisms that maintain concentration
3
gradients across neuronal membranes?
2
When the reverse experiment is conducted, the iso-
lated squid giant axon is passively loaded with 1
(cid:2) 50 100 150 200 250
radioactive *Na by performing the above experiment,
(cid:2) Minutes
and is then transferred to a bath containing cold Na .
(cid:2)
Measuring the quantity of *Na that appears in the Active efflux of Na(cid:2)
(cid:2)
bath per unit of time (d*Na /dt, expressed in counts Passive influx of Na(cid:2) Na(cid:2)
(cid:2)
per minute) allows quantification of the efflux of *Na
(Figure 3.3a). In the presence of dinitrophenol (DNP) [Na(cid:2)] is constant
e
(cid:2)
this *Na efflux quickly diminishes to nearly zero. The
[Na(cid:2)] is constant
process can be started up again by intracellular injec- i
(cid:2) Axon
Na(cid:2)
ATP ADP
tion of ATP. Therefore the *Na efflux is active trans-
port. The movement of Na(cid:2) from the cytosol to the (cid:2) H 2O (cid:2) P i
outside (efflux) can be switched off reversibly by the
FIGURE 3.3 Na(cid:2)fluxes through the membrane of giant axons
use of metabolic inhibitors.
of sepia.
This experiment demonstrates that cells maintain (a)Effect of dinitrophenol (DNP) on the outflux of *Na(cid:2)as a function
their ionic composition in the face of continuous pas- of time. The axon is previously loaded with *Na(cid:2). At t(cid:4)1, the axon
sive exchange of all principal ions by active transport is transferred in a bath devoid of *Na(cid:2). The ordinate (logarithmic)
of these ions in the reverse direction. In other words, axis is the quantity of *Na(cid:2)ions that appear in the bath (that leave
the axon) as a function of time. At t(cid:4)100min, DNP (0.2mM) is
ionic composition of cytosol and extracellular com-
added to the bath for 90min. The efflux, which previously decreased
partments are maintained at the expense of a continu-
linearly with time, is totally blocked after one hour of DNP. This
ous basal metabolism that provides energy (ATP) blockade is reversible. (b)Passive and active Na(cid:2)fluxes are in oppo-
utilized to actively transport ions and thus to compen- site directions. Plot (a) adapted from Hodgkin ALand Keynes RD
sate for their passive movements (Appendix 3.1). (1955) Active transport of cations in giant axons from sepia and loligo.
J. Physiol. (Lond.)128, 28(cid:3)60, with permission.
3.1.3
Na(cid:2)
,
K(cid:2)
,
Ca2(cid:2)
and
Cl(cid:3)
ions passively
cross the plasma membrane through a
particular class of transmembrane
proteins – the channels
Transmembrane proteins span the entire width of the
lipid bilayer (see Figure 3.1). They have hydrophobic
regions containing a high fraction of non-polar amino
acids and hydrophilic regions containing a high
fraction of polar amino acids. Certain hydrophobic
regions organize themselves inside the bilayer as
transmembrane α-helices while more hydrophilic
regions are in contact with the aqueous intracellular
and extracellular environments. Interaction energies
are very high between hydrophobic regions of the pro-
tein and hydrophobic regions of the lipid bilayer, as
well as between hydrophilic regions of the protein and
the extracellular and intracellular environments. These

32
3. IONIC GRADIENTS, MEMBRANE POTENTIAL AND IONIC CURRENTS
TABLE 3.1 Examples of ionic channels
Channels Voltage-gated Ligand-gated Mechanically gated
Opened by Depolarization Extracellular ligand Intracellular ligand Mechanical stimuli
Hyperpolarization
Localization Plasma membrane Plasma membrane Plasma membrane Organelle membrane Plasma membrane
Examples Na(cid:2)channels nAChR G protein-gated IP-gated Ca2(cid:2) Stretch-activated
3
iGluR channels channel channels
Ca2(cid:2)channels 5-HT Ca2(cid:2)-gated channels Ca2(cid:2)-gated
3
Ca2(cid:2)channel
K(cid:2)channels GABA CNG channels
A
Cationic channels GlyR ATP-gated channels
Closed by Inactivation Desensitization Adaptation
Repolarization Ligand recaptureior degradation End of stimulus
Roles Na(cid:2)and Ca2(cid:2)- EPSP EPSP [Ca2(cid:2)] increase Receptor potential
i
dependent action IPSP IPSP
potentials [Ca2(cid:2)] increase Action potential
i
[Ca2(cid:2)] increase repolarization
i
Depolarization
• the binding of an intracellular ligand such as
Ca2(cid:2)
ions or a cyclic nucleotide;
• mechanical stimuli such as stretch – these are
mechanoreceptors.
The channel’s response to its specific stimuli, called
gating, is a simple opening or closing of the pore. The
pore has the important property of selective perme-
ability, allowing some restricted class of small ions to
flow passively down their electrochemical gradients
(see Section 3.3). These gated ions fluxes through pores
make signals for the nervous system.
)Vm(
V
m
3.2 THERE IS A DIFFERENCE OF
(cid:2)20
POTENTIAL BETWEEN THE TWO
FACES OF THE MEMBRANE, CALLED
Repolarization
MEMBRANE POTENTIAL (V )
m
Depolarization
V If a fine-tipped glass pipette (usually called a micro-
(cid:3)60 rest
electrode), connected via a suitable amplifier to a
recording system such as an oscilloscope, is pushed
Hyperpolarization Repolarization
through the membrane of a living nerve cell to reach its
cytoplasm, a potential difference is recorded between
the cytoplasm and the extracellular compartment
(Figure 3.2). In fact, the cell interior shows a negative
Time (ms) potential (typically between (cid:3)60 and(cid:3)80mV) with
FIGURE 3.4 Variations of the membrane potential of neurons respect to the outside, which is taken as the zero refer-
(V m). ence potential. Membrane potential (V m) is by conven-
When the membrane potential is less negative than resting mem-
tion the difference between the potential of the internal
brane potential (V rest), the membrane is said to be depolarized. In and external faces of the membrane (V (cid:4)V (cid:3)V ). In
contrast, when the membrane potential is more negative then V , m i o
rest
the membrane is said to be hyperpolarized. When the membrane the absence of ongoing electrical activity, this negative
varies from a depolarized or hyperpolarized value back to rest, the potential is termed the resting membrane potential
membrane repolarizes. (V ) (Figure 3.4).
rest
We have seen above that in the intracellular and
extracellular media the concentration of positive ions is
equal to that of negative ions. However, there is a very
small excess of positive and negative ions accumulated
on each side of the membrane. At rest, for example, a
small excess of negative ions is accumulated at the
internal side of the membrane whereas a small excess
of positive ions is accumulated at the external side of
the membrane (see Section 3.5). This creates a differ-
ence of potential between the two faces of the mem-
brane: the external side is more positive than the
internal side, which makes V (cid:4)V (cid:3)V , negative.
m i o

3.3 CONCENTRATION GRADIENTS AND MEMBRANE POTENTIAL DETERMINE THE DIRECTION OF THE PASSIVE MOVEMENTS OF IONS 33
What is particular to membrane of neurons (and of (a) V m (cid:4) 0 mV
3
all excitable cells) is that V varies (Figure 3.4). It can be
m
more negative or hyperpolarized or less negative (depo-
larized) or even positive (also depolarized, the internal 140Cl(cid:3)
face is positive compared to the external face). At rest, K(cid:2) 140
V is in the range (cid:3)80/(cid:3)50mV depending on the neu-
m 7
ronal type. But when neurons are active, V varies
Na(cid:2)140
m 7
between the extreme values(cid:3)90mV and(cid:2)30mV. Since
nerve cells communicate through rapid (milliseconds;
ms) or slow (seconds; s) changes in their membrane
10(cid:3)7
potential, it is important to understand V first.
rest
2(cid:2)
Ca
1.5
3.3 CONCENTRATION GRADIENTS AND
MEMBRANE POTENTIAL DETERMINE
(b) V (cid:4) (cid:3)30 mV, no concentration gradient
THE DIRECTION OF THE PASSIVE m
(cid:2)
K(cid:2)
MOVEMENTS OF IONS THROUGH IONIC
(cid:2) (cid:3)
CHANNELS: THE ELECTROCHEMICAL (cid:3)
(cid:2)
(cid:3)
GRADIENT
(cid:2)
(cid:3)
Cl(cid:3) Na(cid:2)
To predict the direction of the passive diffusion of (cid:2) (cid:3)
ions through an open channel, both the concentration (cid:3)
(cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:2)
gradient of the ion and the membrane potential have (cid:3)
to be known. The resultantof these two forces is called (cid:2)
the electrochemical gradient. To understand what the (cid:3)
(cid:2)
electrochemical gradient is for a particular ion, the
concentration gradient and the electrical gradient will Ca2(cid:2)
first be explained separately.
FIGURE 3.5 Passive diffusion of ions.
Passive diffusion of ions according to (a)their concentration gradi-
3.3.1 Ions passively diffuse down their ent only, or (b) to membrane potential (electrical gradient) only
(V (cid:4)(cid:3)30mV).
concentration gradient m
The concentration gradient of a particular ion is the
by active transport (pumps and transporters). However,
difference of concentration of this ion between the two
this is not always true; during intense neuronal activity,
sides of the plasma membrane. Ions passively move (cid:2)
concentration of ions may change (K concentration in
through open channels from the medium where their
particular) owing to the small volume of the external
concentration is high to the medium where their con-
medium in physiological conditions. At the microscopic
centration is lower. Suppose that membrane potential
level this is not true also; intracellular
Ca2(cid:2)
concentra-
is null (V (cid:4)0mV), there is no difference of potential
m tion, for example, can increase locally by a factor of
between the two faces of the membrane, so ions will
between 100 and 1000 but stay stable in the entire cytosol.
diffuse according to their concentration gradient only
However, these increases of ion concentration do not
(Figure 3.5a). Since the extracellular concentrations of
change the direction of the concentration gradient for this
Na(cid:2)
,
Ca2(cid:2)
and
Cl(cid:3)
are higher than the respective intra-
ion since ionic gradients cannot reverse by themselves.
cellular ones, these ions will diffuse passively towards
the intracellular medium (when
Na(cid:2)
,
Ca2(cid:2)
or
Cl(cid:3)
per- 3.3.2 Ions passively diffuse according to
meable channels are open) as a result of their concen- membrane potential
(cid:2)
tration gradient. In contrast, K will move from the
intracellular medium to the extracellular one (when Membrane potential is a potential gradient that
K(cid:2) permeable channels are open). forces ions to passively move in one direction: positive
The force that makes ions move down their concen- ions are attracted by the ‘negative’ side of the membrane
tration gradient is constant for a given ion since it and negative ions by the ‘positive’ one. If we suppose
depends on the difference of concentration of this ion, that there is no concentration gradient for any ions
which is itself continuously controlled to a constant value (there is the same concentration of each ion in the

34
3. IONIC GRADIENTS, MEMBRANE POTENTIAL AND IONIC CURRENTS
extracellular and intracellular media), ions will diffuse From the equation and concentrations of Figure 3.2, the
according to membrane potential only: at a membrane equilibrium potentials for each ion can be calculated:
potential V (cid:4)(cid:3)30mV (Figure 3.5b), positively
charged
ionsm
, the cations
Na(cid:2)
,
Ca2(cid:2)
and
K(cid:2)
, will move
E Na(cid:4)(58/1) log 10(140/14)(cid:4)(cid:2)58mV
from the extracellular medium to the intracellular one E (cid:4)(58/1) log (3/160)(cid:4)(cid:3)84mV
K 10
a (Ccc l(cid:3)o )r d win ilg
l
mto
o
m vee m frob mra n the ep io nt te rn at ci ea ll l.
u
I ln
a
rc mon et dra iust m, a tn oi o thn es E Ca(cid:4)(58/2) log 10(1/10(cid:3)4)(cid:4)(cid:2)116mV
extracellular one. E (cid:4)(58/(cid:3)1) log (150/14)(cid:4)(cid:3)58mV.
Cl 10
These equations have the following meanings. If the
(cid:2)
3.3.3 In physiological conditions, ions channels open in a membrane where K channels are
(cid:2)
passively diffuse according to the the only channels open, the efflux of K ions will
electrochemical gradient hyperpolarize the membrane until V (cid:4)E (cid:4)(cid:3)84mV,
m K
(cid:2) (cid:2)
a potential at which the net flux of K is null since K
In physiological conditions, both the concentration
ions have exactly the same tendency to diffuse towards
gradient and membrane potential determine the direc-
the intracellular medium according to their concentra-
tion and amplitude of ion diffusion through an open
tion gradient than to move in the reverse direction
channel. Since concentration gradient is constant for
according to membrane potential. At that potential the
each ion, the direction and amplitude of diffusion (cid:2)
efflux of K will be exactly compensated by the influx
varies with membrane potential. When comparing (cid:2)
of K and the membrane potential will stay stable at
Figure 3.5a andbit appears that at a membrane poten- V (cid:4)E as long as K(cid:2) channels stay open. Now, if
tial of(cid:3)30mV, concentration gradient and membrane m K (cid:2)
only Na channels are open, the membrane potential
potential drive
Na(cid:2)
and
Ca2(cid:2)
ions in the same direc- will move toward V (cid:4)(cid:2)58mV, the potential at
m
tion, toward the intracellular medium, whereas they (cid:2)
which the net flux of Na is null. Similarly, when
(cid:2) (cid:3)
drive K and Cl in reverse directions. The resultant of V (cid:4)E (cid:4)(cid:3)60mV, Cl(cid:3) ions have the same tendency
m Cl
these two forces, concentration and potential gradi-
to move down their concentration gradient than to
ents, is the electrochemical gradient. To know how to
move in the reverse direction according to membrane
express the electrochemical gradient, the equilibrium (cid:3)
potential, the net flux of Cl is null. In contrast, when
potential must first be explained. (cid:3)
V is different from E , the net flux of Cl is not null.
m Cl
This holds true for all the other ions: when V is
m
different from E there is a net flux of this ion.
The equilibrium potential for a given ion, E ion
ion
All systems are moving toward equilibrium. The The electrochemical gradient
value of membrane potential where the concentration
force that tends to move a particular ion in one direc- We have seen that when V m(cid:4)E ion(i.e. V m(cid:3)E ion(cid:4)0),
tion is exactly balanced by the electrical force that tends there is no diffusion of this particular ion (f net(cid:4)0). In
to move the same ion in the reverse direction is called contrast, when V mis different from E ionthere is a passive
the ‘equilibrium potential’ of the ion (E ) or the rever- diffusion of this ion through an open channel. The dif-
ion
sal potential of the ion E rev. The equilibrium potential ference (V m(cid:3)E ion) is called the electrochemical gradi-
for a particular ion is the value of V for which the net ent. It is the force that makes the ion move through
m
flux of this ion (f ) through an open channel is null: an open channel.
net
when V (cid:4)E , f (cid:4)0mol s(cid:3)1.
m ion net
E can be calculated using the Nernst equation (see
ion
Appendix 3.3): 3.4 THE PASSIVE DIFFUSION OF
IONS THROUGH AN OPEN
E (cid:4)(RT/zF) ln([ion] /[ion]), CHANNEL CREATES A CURRENT
ion e i
where R is the constant of an ideal gas (8.314
VCK(cid:3)1
mol(cid:3)1); T is the absolute temperature in kelvin To know the direction of passive diffusion of a par-
(273.16(cid:2)the temperature in °C); Fis the Faraday con- ticular ion and how many of these ions diffuse per unit
stant (96 500C mol(cid:3)1); z is the valence of the ion; and of time, the direction and intensity of the net flux of
[ion] is the concentration of the ion in the extracellular ions (number of moles per second) through an open
.
(e) or intracellular (i) medium. This gives: channel have to be measured. Usually the net flux (f net)
is not measured; the electrical counterpart of this net
E (cid:4) (58/z) log ([ion] /[ion]), (1) flux, the ionic current, is measured instead.
ion 10 e i

3.4 THE PASSIVE DIFFUSION OF IONS THROUGH AN OPEN CHANNEL CREATES A CURRENT 35
Passive diffusion of ions through an open channel is (a)
a movement of charges through a resistance (resistance
here is a measure of the difficulty of ions moving Extra (cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)
through the channel pore). Movement of charges through
a resistance is a current. Through a single channel the
current is called ‘single-channel current’ or ‘unitary V
m
current’, i . The relation between f andi is:
ion net ion
i (cid:4)f zF mb Aqueous
ion net pore
The amplitude of i is expressed in ampères (A)
ion
which are coulombs per seconds (C
s(cid:3)1).
F is the
Faraday constant (96 500C); zis the valence of the ion
((cid:2)1 for Na(cid:2) and K(cid:2) ,(cid:3)1 for Cl(cid:3) , (cid:2)2 for Ca(cid:2) ); and f is Intra (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)
net
the net flux of the ion in mol
s(cid:3)1.
In general, currents are expressed following Ohm’s
Law: U(cid:4)RI, where I is the current through a resist- Na(cid:2)
ance Rand Uis the difference of potential between the
two ends of the resistance. For currents carried by ions (b) (cid:2)
(and not by electrons as in copper wires), Iis called i ,
ion
the current that passes through the resistance of the
channel pore which has a resistance R(called r ion). But V m (cid:2) Na
what is U in biological systems? U is the force that
makes ions move in a particular direction; it is the elec-
trochemical gradient for the considered ion and is also
called the driving force: U(cid:4)V (cid:3)E (Figure 3.6). E Na
m ion
l
Na
Unitary current, i
ion
(cid:3)
According to Ohm’s Law, the current i ionthrough a FIGURE 3.6 The Na(cid:2)channel.
single channel is derived from
(a)Schematic, and (b)its electrical equivalent.
(V (cid:3)E )(cid:4)r . i
m ion ion ion
total current I that crosses the membrane at time tis
So: Na
the sum of the unitary currents i at time t:
Na
i ion(cid:4) (1/r ion)(V m(cid:3)E ion) (cid:4)γ ion(V m(cid:3)E ion) I (cid:4)Np i
Na o Na
γ is the reciprocal of resistance; it is called the con- (cid:2)
ion where N is the number of Na channels present in the
ductanceof the channel, or unitary conductance (Figure (cid:2)
membrane; p is the probability of Na channels being
o
3.6). It is a measure of the ease of flow of ions (flow of
open at time t (Np is therefore the number of open
o
current) through the channel pore. Whereas resistance (cid:2)
Na channels in the membrane at time t); and i is
is expressed in ohms (Ω), conductance is expressed in (cid:2) Na
the unitary Na current. More generally:
siemens (S). By convention i is negative when it rep-
resents an inward flux of posio itn ive charges (cations) and I ion(cid:4)Np oi ion
i ion is positive when it represents an outward flux of By analogy, the total conductance of the membrane
positive charges (Figure 3.5c). It is generally of the for a particular ion is:
order of pico-ampères (1
pA(cid:4)10(cid:3)12A).
At physiologi-
cal concentrations, γ varies between 10 and 150 pico- G ion(cid:4)Np oγ ion
ion
siemens (pS), according to the channel type. and from i (cid:4)γ (V (cid:3)E ) above:
ion ion m ion
I (cid:4)G (V (cid:3)E )
ion ion m ion
Total current, I
ion
I and i can be measured experimentally. The latter
ion ion
In physiological conditions, several channels of the is the current measured from a patch of membrane
same type are open at the same time in the neuronal where only one channel of a particular type is present.
membrane. Suppose that only one type of channel is I is the current measured from a whole cell mem-
ion
(cid:2)
open in the membrane, for example Na channels, the brane where Nchannels of the same type are present.

36
3. IONIC GRADIENTS, MEMBRANE POTENTIAL AND IONIC CURRENTS
Roles of ionic currents
Ionic currents have two main functions:
• Ionic currents change the membrane potential:
either they depolarize the membrane or repolarize it
or hyperpolarize it, depending on the charge carrier.
These terms are in reference to resting potential
(Figure 3.4). Changes of membrane potential are
signals. Adepolarization can be an action potential
(see Chapters 4 and 5) or a postsynaptic excitatory
potential (EPSP; see Chapters 8 and 10). An hyper- — —
polarization can be a postsynaptic inhibi-tory —
potential (IPSP; see Chapter 9). These changes
—
of membrane potential are essential to neuronal
—
communication. —
• Ionic currents increase the concentration of a par- —
ticular ion in the intracellular medium. Calcium
current, for example, is always inward. It transiently
and locally increases the intracellular concentra-
tion of
Ca2(cid:2)
ions and contributes to the triggering
of
Ca2(cid:2)
-dependent events such as secretion or
—
contraction. —
—
—
3.5 A PARTICULAR MEMBRANE —
POTENTIAL, THE RESTING —
MEMBRANE POTENTIAL V
rest
In the absence of ongoing electrical activity (when the
neuron is not excited or inhibited by the activation of
its afferents) its membrane potential is termed the rest-
ing membrane potential (V ). For some neurons, V rest rest
is stable (silent neurons) for others it is not (pacemaker
neurons for example). In this section, we will consider
stable V only. To understand unstable V many dif-
rest rest
ferent channels must be known that are explained later
in the book (Chapter 14).
3.5.1 When most of the channels open at rest
(cid:2)
are K channels V is close to E
rest K
It was Julius Bernstein (1902) who pioneered the the-
ory of V as due to selective permeability of the
rest
membrane to one ionic species only and that nerve
excitation developed when such selectivity was tran-
siently lost. According to this theory, under resting
conditions the cell membrane permeability is minimal
to
Na(cid:2)
,
Cl(cid:3)
and
Ca2(cid:2)
while it is high to
K(cid:2)
. What is the
(cid:2) membrane potential of a membrane permeable to K
ions only? This condition can be tested experimentally
by measuring ionic fluxes with radioactive tracers
(cid:2)
through a plasma membrane where K channels are
(cid:2)
the only open channels. K moves outwards following
—
—
(a)
K(cid:2) (cid:4) 140
i K(cid:2) (cid:4) 3 0
(b) K(cid:2)
(cid:2)
K(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
K(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
K(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
K(cid:2)
(c) K(cid:2)
K(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2) (cid:2)
K(cid:2) (cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)—
KK (cid:2)(cid:2) K(cid:2) K(cid:2)
V
m
(cid:4)E q Eu Ki l (cid:4)ib r (cid:3)iu 9m
7 mV
K(cid:2) (cid:2)
K(cid:2) (cid:2) — (cid:2)
(cid:2)
K(cid:2)
FIGURE 3.7 Establishment of V in a cell where most of the
rest channels open are K(cid:2)channels.
Suppose that at t(cid:4)0 and cell potential V (cid:4)0mV (a), K(cid:2)ions will
m
move outwards due to their concentration gradient (b). Loss of intra-
cellular K(cid:2)induces a negative potential (V ) as V (cid:4)E (c). m m K
its concentration gradient (the intracellular concentra-
(cid:2)
tion of K is around 50 times higher than the extracel-
lular one): positive charges are thus subtracted from
the intracellular medium and there is an accumulation
of negative charges at the intracellular side of the
membrane and positive charges at the external side of
the membrane. These positive charges will oppose fur-
(cid:2)
ther outward movements of K until an equilibrium
(cid:2)
is reached when the concentration gradient for K can-
cels the drive exerted by the electrical gradient. This is
by definition the equilibrium potential E . Hence, at
K
V (cid:4)E , although K(cid:2) keeps moving in and out of the
m K
cell, there is no net change in its concentration across
the membrane (Figure 3.7). In a physiological situa-
tion, the exact value of E is unknown since the exact
K
[K(cid:2) ] is unknown. When V (cid:4)(cid:3)80/(cid:3)70mV, though
i rest
it seems close to E it may not be equal to E .
K K
A way to test whether V (cid:4)E is the following.
rest K
(cid:2)
Inspection of the Nernst equation applied to K indi-
cates that a 10-fold change in the concentration ratio

3.5 A PARTICULAR MEMBRANE POTENTIAL, THE RESTING MEMBRANE POTENTIAL V 37
rest
[K(cid:2)] mM useful to introduce what is commonly called the
o
3 10 Goldman–Hodgkin–Katz equation (GHK), derived from
the Nernst equation and named after the three physiol-
ogists responsible for its derivation:
p [K(cid:2)] (cid:2)p [Na(cid:2)] (cid:2)p [Cl(cid:3)]
V (cid:4) 58log(cid:5) K o Na o Cl i (2)
rest p [K(cid:2)(cid:2)] (cid:2)p [Na(cid:2)] (cid:2)p [Cl(cid:3)]
K i Na i Cl o
E (cid:4) 58 log[K(cid:2)] where pis the permeability coefficient (cm s(cid:3)1) for each
K o
[K(cid:2)] ionic species. The relative contribution of each ion
i species to the resting voltage is weighted by that ion’s
permeability.
(cid:2) (cid:3)
Note that if the resting permeability to Na and Cl
is very low, the GHK equation closely resembles the
(cid:2)
Nernst equation for K .
In applying the GHK equation to nerve cells, the fol-
lowing assumptions must be made:
• The voltage gradient across the membrane is uni-
form in the sense that it changes linearly within the
membrane. This assumption has led to the GHK
equation being called the constant field equation.
• The overall net current flow across the membrane is
zero as the currents generated by individual ionic
species are balanced out.
• The membrane is in a steady state since there is no
time-dependent change in ionic flux or channel
density. This is obviously not applicable to non-
steady state conditions of rapidly changing mem-
brane potential as produced when a nerve cell fires
action potentials.
• Any role of active transport mechanisms is ignored.
• The ionic species are monovalent cations or anions
which do not interact among themselves or with
water molecules. The first point does not hold true
if there is a measurable permeability to divalent
cations such as
Ca2(cid:2)
. Furthermore, it has been
reported that ions can interact among themselves
within the same channel.
• The role of membrane surface charges is ignored. This
is a relatively major limitation because the cell mem-
brane contains negative charges on its inner and outer
layers (amino acid residues of membrane proteins
which are typically negatively charged). The electric
field generated by these charges is able to influence
the kinetic properties of ionic channels (gating, activa-
tion and inactivation). Adding divalent cations such
as
Ca2(cid:2)
or
Mg2(cid:2)
leads to screening of these charges
and consequent changes in channel properties.
• The mobility of each ionic species and its diffusion
coefficient (D) within the membrane of thickness
(δ) is constant.
• The ions do not bind to specific sites in the membrane
and their concentration (C) can be expressed by a
)Vm(
V
m
30 100
0
(cid:3)20
(cid:3)40
(cid:3)60
(cid:3)80
FIGURE 3.8 Theoretical diagram of E versus the external con-
K
centration of K(cid:2)ions ([K(cid:2)]o).
E (cid:4) (RT/zF)2.3 (cid:5)log([K(cid:2)] /[K(cid:2)]).
K o i
should alter the membrane potential of a neuron by
58mV. This relation can be tested in experiments in
which the extracellular concentration of this ion is
altered and the resulting membrane potential meas-
ured with a sharp or patch microelectrode. Asemilog
(cid:2)
plot of the extracellular K concentration (abscissa)
against the membrane potential (ordinate) should thus
(cid:2)
have a slope of 58mV per 10-fold change in K (Figure
3.8); this condition is rarely encountered in neurons but
it seems to be more common for glial cells (which some-
(cid:2)
times are termed K electrodes because their mem-
(cid:2)
brane potential is linearly dependent on K ). In the case
of neurons, nonlinearity of this plot is frequently seen,
(cid:2)
particularly at low levels of extracellular K . These
(cid:2)
observations confirm that K is a very important ion
for setting the value of neuronal V but that other ions
rest
must also play a significant role.
(cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:2)
3.5.2 In central neurons, K , Cl and Na ion
movements participate in resting
membrane potential and V is different
rest
from E : the Goldman–Hodgkin–Katz
K
equation
(cid:2)
Aside from K , which ions play a role in V ? Since
rest
(cid:2)
the intracellular concentration of Na is not negligible,
this implies that this ionic species can accumulate
inside the cytoplasm, presumably because of its rather
positive E ((cid:2)75mV) versus a very negative V cre-
Na rest
ates an electrochemical gradient extremely favourable
(cid:2) to Na entry. Equally, the asymmetric distribution of
(cid:3)
Cl suggests its possible role in determining V . In
rest
order to take into account various ionic species it is

38
3. IONIC GRADIENTS, MEMBRANE POTENTIAL AND IONIC CURRENTS
linear partition coefficient (β(cid:4)C /C ). g (cid:2)g (cid:2)g . One may consider, instead of the absolute
membrane solution K Na Cl
However, there is evidence that ions can bind to sites value of membrane potential, only its deviation from
inside channels and influence channel kinetics. V . In this case the equivalent electromotive force
rest
• The ionic activities (a) can be replaced by their becomes equal to zero and the equivalent scheme of the
concentrations. cell membrane simplifies to an RC-circuit (Figure 3.9c).
If one includes more channel types, then the notion of
resting current still holds true. The equivalent scheme
3.6 A SIMPLE EQUIVALENT of Figure 3.9cis applicable only to depolarizations and
ELECTRICAL CIRCUIT FOR THE hyperpolarizations characterized by linear (ohmic)
MEMBRANE AT REST current(cid:3)voltage relations (Figure 3.9d). In standard
excitable cells it means that these potential changes from
V are not activating voltage-gated currents; e.g. they
rest
Since the plasma membrane does not allow the pas- are below the threshold for spike generation.
sage of all the ions at all time, it can be equated to an
insulator separating two electrically conductive media
(intracellular and extracellular electrolytes): it thus 3.7 HOW TO EXPERIMENTALLY
plays the role of a dielectric in a capacitorand it can be CHANGE V
rest
assigned an average capacity (C ) value of 1 μF cm(cid:3)2.
m
In Figure 3.9b, instead of three parallel current sources
3.7.1 How to experimentally depolarize a
(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)
for K , Na and Cl , we have lumped them together
neuronal membrane
into only one source with driving (electromotive) force
Eequal to V and an inward conductance g equal to The aim of the experiment is to lower the difference of
rest m
the sum of the specific ionic (channel) conductances potential between the two faces of the membrane and
Inside
E E E E
K CI Na rest
C C
m m
g g g g
K CI Na m
Outside
(a) (b) (c)
mV
(cid:3)30
(d)
(cid:3)50
(cid:3)1 (cid:3)0.5 (cid:2)0.5 nA
100 ms
(cid:3)100
An
Vm
(cid:2)0.4
l (cid:3)0.4
(cid:3)30
V
m
(cid:3)70
FIGURE 3.9 Simplified equivalent scheme to account for membrane electrical characteristics near the
resting potential and ohmic behaviour of the membrane potential around the resting potential.
(a)Three main ionic current sources. Note: E and E are negative while E is positive. (b)An equivalent cur-
K Cl Na
rent source for the resting potential. (c)Electrical scheme for below-threshold potential changes (passive de-
and hyperpolarizations) relative to the resting potential. Battery symbols indicate electromotive forces, boxes
represent conductances and parallel plates indicate membrane capacitors. (d) From top to bottom: Time-
dependent responses to (cid:6)0.4 nAcurrent injected for 300ms; left: upper traces, current I; middle traces, mem-
brane potential changes V ; right: membrane potential at the end of the current pulse (i.e. at 300ms) plotted
m
against current intensity. From Adams PR, Brown DA, Constanti A(1982) M-currents and other potassium
currents in bullfrog sympathetic neurones. J. Physiol. (Lond.)330, 537(cid:3)572, with permission.

3.7 HOW TO EXPERIMENTALLY CHANGE V 39
rest
even to reverse it. There are at least three main ways of In the case of silver electrode inside the pipette, as a
(cid:2)
depolarizing a membrane: (a) by increasing the K coat of AgCl is deposited on the silver metal, it provides
(cid:2) (cid:3)
concentration in the external medium, (b) by applying a store of Ag and Cl ions and mediates between elec-
a drug that opens cationic channels or (c) by injecting a tronic conduction in the metal (Ag(cid:2) (cid:2)e(cid:3) (cid:2) Ag) and
(cid:3)
positive current inside the neuron (Figure 3.10). ionic current owing that Cl exchanges between pre-
An in vitropreparation such as a neuronal culture or cipitate (AgCl) and solution.
a brain slice is bathed in an extracellular solution of an
ionic composition close to that of the extracellular
3.7.2 How to experimentally hyperpolarize
medium. Arecording electrode is implanted in a neu-
a neuronal membrane?
ronal cell body. At rest the membrane potential is close
to (cid:3)70mV. When the extracellular solution is changed The aim of the experiment is to increase the difference
(cid:2)
to one containing a higher concentration of K ions of potential between the two faces of the membrane.
(30mM instead of 3mM) and a lower concentration of There are at least two main ways of hyperpolarizing a
(cid:2) (cid:2)
Na ions (113mM instead of 140mM) to keep constant membrane, (a) by applying a drug that opens K channels
the extracellular concentration of positive ions, a depo- or (b) by injecting a negative current inside the neuron.
larization is recorded. Since at rest most of the chan- An in vitropreparation such as a neuronal culture or
(cid:2)
nels open are K channels, V tends toward E which a brain slice is bathed in a physiological saline of an
m K
is now equal to (cid:3)38mV (E (cid:4)58 log 30/140) instead ionic composition close to that of the extracellular
K
of (cid:3)97mV. The membrane depolarizes because E is medium. Arecording electrode is implanted in a neu-
K
(cid:2)
more depolarized than V . ronal cell body. A peptide that opens K channels is
rest
In the same preparation bathed in control extracel- applied by pressure via a pipette located close to the
lular medium, veratridine is applied by pressure via a recorded neuron. This induces a hyperpolarization of
(cid:2)
pipette located close to the recorded neuron. Veratridine the membrane, due the outward flux of K ions
(cid:2)
induces a depolarization of the recorded membrane (Figure 3.11a). As this drug opens K channels (via
(cid:2) (cid:2)
(Figure 3.10a). As this drug opens Na channels, Na metabotropic receptors such as GABA receptors,
B
(cid:2)
ions enter the cell and create an inward current of pos- Chapter 11), K ions exit the cell and create an outward
itive charges. The electrical circuit is closed because(cid:2) current of positive charges. The electrical circuit is
(cid:2)
charges can go out of the cell via the K channels open closed because ions can enter the membrane via the
(cid:2) (cid:2)
at rest. Since Na channels now represent the major channels open at rest. As K channels now represent
population of open channels, V tends toward E the major population of open channels, V tends
m Na m
((cid:2)58mV) and the membrane depolarizes as long as toward E ((cid:3)97mV) and the membrane hyperpolar-
K
veratridine is applied. izes as long as the peptide is applied.
If now a positive current is applied through the
(cid:2)
recording pipette which contains a KCl solution, K
ions are expelled from the pipette. They create a cur-
(cid:2)(cid:3)
rent of positive charges that depolarizes the membrane
(Figure 3.10b). The electrical circuit is closed because
(cid:2) (cid:2)
K ions can go through the membrane via the K
channels open at rest. Adepolarizing current pulse is a
positive current injected via an intracellular electrode.
One part of the stimulating current is used to load the
K+ I
pca ap rta c pi aty
ss
C esm tho rf
o
t uh ge
h
n te hu er o ion na l
c
hm ae nm neb lr sa :ne and the other NN aa ++ NN aa ++ K K+ +K K+ K+
+
I (cid:4)C dV/dt(cid:2)I
stimulus m ion
dV/dt(cid:4)[(cid:3)I (cid:2)I ]/C
ion stimulus m
Apositive stimulating current applied at the inside of
a neuron (cell body, dendrite, axon) will cause a depolar-
ization of V according to the above equation. Inversely,
m
a negative current will hyperpolarize the membrane (see
below). Once the membrane capacity isloaded (steady
FIGURE 3.10 Vm is depolarized by applying:
state) the injected current equals thecurrent passing (a) a drug in the extracellular medium that opens Na(cid:2) channels
through the membrane via open channels. (veratridine) or (b) a positive current via an intracellular electrode.

40
3. IONIC GRADIENTS, MEMBRANE POTENTIAL AND IONIC CURRENTS
(cid:3)(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
a cationic channel is permeable to cations: Na , K
and sometimes also
Ca2(cid:2)
.
• The directionof ion diffusion through a single chan-
nel depends on the electrochemical gradient or
driving force for this particular ion (V (cid:3)E ).
m ion
• The numberof charges that diffuse through an open
CI(cid:3)
I
CI(cid:3) channel per unit of time (i ) depends on the elec-
CI(cid:3) C CI(cid:3) I(cid:3) trochemical gradient (V m(cid:3)ion E ion) but also on how
easily ions move through the pore of the channel
(expressed as the conductance γ of the channel):
ion
i (cid:4)γ (V (cid:3)E ).
ion ion m ion
How and where do ions actively cross the plasma
membrane and thus compensate for the passive
movements? (see also Appendix 3.1)
FIGURE 3.11 V is hyperpolarized by applying a negative cur-
rent via an
intracelm
lular electrode. Active movements of
Na(cid:2)
,
K(cid:2)
,
Ca2(cid:2)
or
Cl(cid:3)
ions
across the membrane occur through pumps or trans-
porters. Pumps obtain energy from the hydrolysis of
If now a negative current is applied through the ATP, whereas transporters use the energy of an ionic
recording pipette which contains a KCl solution, Cl(cid:3) gradient, for example the sodium driving force. These
ions are expelled from the pipette. They hyperpolarize transports require energy since they operate against
the membrane (Figure 3.11). The electrical circuit is the electrochemical gradient of the transported ions or
closed because ions can go through the membrane via molecules. They maintain ionic concentrations at con-
the channels open at rest. stant values in the extracellular and intracellular com-
partments despite the continuous passive movements
of ions across the membrane.
3.8 SUMMARY
What are the roles of electrochemical gradients and
passive movements of ions?
Passage of ions through the membrane is a regu-
lated process and the flow of ions across the neuronal The electrochemical gradients of ions are a reserve of
plasma membrane is not a simple and anarchic diffu- energy: they allow the existence of ionic currents and
sion through a lipid bilayer. Instead, it is restricted drive some active transports. The large asymmetries in
through transmembrane proteins whose opening ion distribution imply a dynamic state through which
(channel proteins) or activation (pumps or trans- cell-to-cell signalling is made possible. Ionic currents
porters) is tightly controlled by different factors. have two main functions: (i) they evoke transient
changes of membrane potential which are electrical sig-
nals of the neuron (action potentials or postsynaptic
Where and how do ions passively cross the plasma
potentials or sensory potentials) essential to neuronal
membrane? (See also Appendices 3.2 and 3.3)
communication; and (ii) they locally increase the concen-
tration of a particular ion in the intracellular medium,
• Ions move passively across the plasma membrane
for example
Ca2(cid:2)
ions, and thus trigger intracellular
through ionic channels that are specifically perme- Ca2(cid:2)
-dependent events such as secretion or contraction.
able to one or several ions of the same sign. They
move down their electrochemical gradient. This
passive movement of charges is a current that can
APPENDIX 3.1
be recorded. Through a single channel it is a uni-
THE ACTIVE TRANSPORT OF
tary current i , and through N channels it is a
ion IONS BY PUMPS AND TRANSPORTERS
macroscopic current or total current I .
ion MAINTAIN THE UNEQUAL
• The type of ion that moves through an open chan-
DISTRIBUTION OF IONS
nel (ionic selectivity of the channel pore) is deter-
mined by the structure of the channel itself. This
ionic selectivity gives the name to the channel. For Passive movements of
Na(cid:2)
,
K(cid:2)
,
Ca2(cid:2)
or
Cl(cid:3)
ions
(cid:2) (cid:2)
example, a Na channel is permeable to Na ions; across the membrane would finally cause concentration

41
APPENDIX 3.1 THE ACTIVE TRANSPORT OF IONS BY PUMPS AND TRANSPORTERS MAINTAIN THE UNEQUAL DISTRIBUTION OF IONS
changes in the extracellular and intracellular compart- 3 Na(cid:2)
ments if they were not constantly regulated during the
entire life of the neuron by transport of ions in the
reverse direction, against passive diffusion; i.e. against 1 Ca2(cid:2)
electrochemical gradients. This type of transport is 1 K(cid:2)
described as active since it requires energy in order to
1 Cl(cid:3)
oppose the electrochemical gradient of the transported
ions. Ions cross the membrane activelythrough special- 2 K(cid:2)
ized proteins known as pumps or transporters. Pumps
obtain energy from the hydrolysis of ATP, whereas 1 Ca2(cid:2)
transporters use the energy of an ionic gradient, for
example the sodium driving force. The energy is
needed for the conformational changes that allow the
pump or the transporter to change its affinity for the
ion transported during the transport: the binding site(s)
must have a high affinity when facing the medium
FIGURE A3.1
where the transported ion is at a low concentration (in Transport against the electrochemical gradient of the ion
order to bind it) and must change to low affinity when
Transport along the electrochemical gradient of the ion
facing the medium where the concentration of the
ATPhydrolysis
transported ion is high in order to release it.
Pumps are ATPases that actively transport ions side, the protein is in a conformation with a low affin-
(cid:2) (cid:2)
ity for Na ions so that the three Na are released in
Pumps have ATPase activity (they hydrolyze ATP).
the extracellular space.
This ATPase activity is generally the easiest way of (cid:2) (cid:2)
The steady unequal distribution of Na and K ions
identifying them. Pumps are membrane-embedded
constitutes a reserve of energy for a cell. The neuron
enzymes that couple the hydrolysis of ATP to active
uses this energy to produce electric signals (action
translocation of ions across the membrane. The central
potentials, synaptic potentials) as well as to actively
issue of ion motive ATPases is to couple the hydrolysis
transport other molecules.
of ATP(and their auto-phosphorylation) to the translo-
cation of ions.
The Ca-ATPase pump
The Na/K-ATPase pump The function of Ca-ATPases is to maintain (with the
Na–Ca transporter) the intracellular
Ca2(cid:2)
concentration
Na/K-ATPases maintain the unequal distribution at very low levels by active expulsion of Ca2(cid:2) . In fact,
of Na(cid:2) and K(cid:2) ions across the membrane. Na(cid:2) and K(cid:2) the intracellular Ca2(cid:2) concentration is 10,000 times
(cid:2)
ions cross the membrane through different Na and lower than the extracellular concentration despite the
K(cid:2) permeable channels (voltage-sensitive Na(cid:2) and K(cid:2) inflow of Ca2(cid:2) (through receptor channels and voltage-
channels plus receptor channels). This pump operates gated Ca2(cid:2) channels) and the intracellular release of
continuously at a rhythm of 100 ions per second (com- Ca2(cid:2) from intracellular stores. Maintaining a low intra-
pared with 106–108 ions per second for a channel), cellular Ca2(cid:2) concentration is critical since Ca2(cid:2) ions
adjusting its activity to the electrical activity of the control several intracellular reactions and are toxic at a
(cid:2)
neuron. It actively transports three Na ions towards high concentration. Ca-ATPases are located in the
(cid:2)
the extracellular space for each two K ions that it car- plasma membrane and in the membrane of the reticu-
ries into the cell. lum. The former extrude Ca2(cid:2) from the cytoplasm
The energy of ATPhydrolysis is needed for the con- whereas the latter sequester Ca2(cid:2) inside the reticulum
formational changes (they are energy-dependent) that (see also Figure 7.8).
allow the pump to change its affinity for the ion trans-
ported, whether the binding sites are accessible from
Transporters use the energy stored in the
the cytoplasmic or the extracellular sides. For example,
transmembrane electrochemical gradient of
(cid:2)
when the Na binding sites are accessible from the (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
Na , K , H or other ions
cytoplasm, the protein is in a conformation with a high
affinity (K (cid:4)1mM) for intracellular Na(cid:2) ions, and so When transporters carry Na(cid:2) , K(cid:2) or H(cid:2) ions (along
A
(cid:2)
Na ions bind to the three sites. In contrast, when the their electrochemical gradient) in the same direction as
(cid:2)
three Na have been translocated to the extracellular the transported ion or molecule the process is called

42
3. IONIC GRADIENTS, MEMBRANE POTENTIAL AND IONIC CURRENTS
symport. When the movements occur in opposite direc- • Which type(s) of ions will move through a given
tions the process is called antiport. We shall study only open channel: cations, anions?
transporters implicated in the electrical or secretory • In which direction will these ions move, from the
activity of neurons. external medium to the cytosol or the reverse?
• How many of these ions will move per unit of time?
The Na–Ca transporter
This transporter uses the energy of the Na(cid:2) gradient The structure of the channel pore determines the type
to actively carry Ca2(cid:2) ions towards the extracellular of ion(s) that diffuse passively through the channel
environment. It is situated in the neuronal plasma mem-
The pores of ion channels select their permeant ions.
brane and operates in synergy with the Ca-ATPase and
The structural basis for ion channel selectivity has been
with transport mechanisms of the smooth sarcoplasmic (cid:2)
reticulum to maintain the intracellular
Ca2(cid:2)
concentra-
studied in a bacterial K channel ca (cid:2)lled the KcsAchan (cid:2)-
nel (it is a voltage-independent K channel). All K
tion at a very low level (see Section 7.2.4).
channels show a selectivity sequence
K(cid:2)(cid:4)Rb(cid:2)(cid:7)Cs(cid:2)
,
whereas permeability for the smallest alkali metal ions
The K–Cl transporter KCC (cid:2) (cid:2)
Na and Li is extremely low. Potassium is at least
(cid:2)
10,000 times more permeant than Na , a feature that is
Adult mammalian central neurons maintain a low
(cid:2)
(cid:3) (cid:3) essential to the function of K channels. Each subunit
intracellular Cl concentration. Cl extrusion is
(cid:2) (cid:3) of the KcsAchannel consists of an N-terminal cytoplas-
achieved by K -Cl cotransporters (KCC) fuelled by
(cid:2) mic domain, followed by two transmembrane helices
K . As all transporters, it does not directly consume
and a C-terminal globular domain in the cytoplasm.
ATP but derives its energy from ionic gradients, here
(cid:2) The P loop (P for pore) situated between transmem-
the K gradient generated by the Na/K/ATPase.
brane helices 1 and 2 is the region primarily responsible
for ion selectivity.
Neurotransmitter transporters
The KcsAchannel is overexpressed in bacteria and
Inactivation of most neurotransmitters present in the the three-dimensional structure of its pore investigated
synaptic cleft is achieved by rapid reuptake into the by the use of X-ray crystallography. The KcsAchannel
presynaptic neural element and astrocytic glial cells. is a tetramer with fourfold symmetry around a central
This is performed by specific neurotransmitter trans- pore (Figure A3.2). The pore is constructed of an
porters, transmembrane proteins that couple neuro- inverted teepee with the extracellular side correspon-
transmitter transport to the movement of ions down ding to the base of the teepee. The overall length of the
their concentration gradient. Certain neurotransmitter pore is 4.5nm and its diameter varies along its distance.
precursors are also taken up by this type of active From inside the cell the pore begins as a water-filled
transport (glutamine and choline, for instance). Once
in the cytoplasm, neurotransmitters are concentrated (a) (b) Selectivity
inside synaptic vesicles by distinct transport systems filter
driven by the H(cid:2) concentration gradient (maintained K csA
(cid:2) channel subunit
by the vesicular H -ATPase) (see Section 7.4).
S1
S3
APPENDIX 3.2
P
THE PASSIVE DIFFUSION OF IONS
THROUGH AN OPEN CHANNEL
N
It has been stated above that a channel is said to be in C Cavity
a closed state (C) when its ionic pore does not allow ions
to pass. In contrast, when the channel is said to be in the
open state (O), ions can diffuse through the ionic pore. FIGURE A3.2 (a)membrane topology of the KcsAchannel sub-
unit showing the two transmembrane segments and the pore loop
C (cid:2) O (P). (b) Two diametrically opposed subunits of KcsAare depicted to
show the cavity in the membrane with 3 ions in cavity, S3 and S1
This diffusion of ions through an open channel is a
sites of the selectivity filter (shown in sticks). Adapted from Noskov
passive transport since it does not require energy SY and Roux B (2006) Ion selectivity in potassium channels.
expenditure. Biophysical Chemistry124, 279(cid:3)291.

43
APPENDIX 3.3 THE NERNST EQUATION
tunnel of 1.8nm length (inner pore) surrounded by pre- ion can pass through at one time. To compensate for
dominantly non-polar side-chains pointing to the pore the energy cost of dehydration, the carbonyl oxygen
axis. The diameter of this region is sufficiently wide to atoms come in very close contact with the ion and act
allow the passage of fully hydrated cations. This long like surrogate water – they substitute for the hydration
(cid:2)
entry way then opens to a wider water-filled cavity waters of K . This filter is too large to accommodate a
(cid:2)
(1nm across). Beyond this vestibule is the 1.2nm long Na ion with its smaller radius (main chain oxygens
selectivity filter. After this, the pore opens widely to the are spatially inflexible and their relative distances to
extracellular side of the membrane. the centre of the pore cannot readily be changed). It is
(cid:2)
proposed that a K ion fits in the filter so precisely that
What are the respective roles of the parts of the pore? the energetic costs and gains are well balanced.
The pore comprises a wide, non-polar aqueous cav-
(cid:2)
What drives K ions to move on?
ity on the intracellular side, leading up, on the extra-
cellular side, to a narrow pore that is 1.2nm long and (cid:2)
K ions bind simultaneously at two binding sites
lined exclusively by main chain carbonyl oxygens
0.75nmapart near the entry and exit point of the selec-
formed by the residues corresponding to the signature
tivity filter. Binding at adjacent sites may provide the
(cid:2)
sequence TTVGYG common to all K channels.
repulsive force for ion flow through the selectivity filter:
Electrostatic calculations show that when an ion is (cid:2)
two K ions at close proximity in the selectivity filter
moved along a narrow pore through a membrane it
repel each other. The repulsion overcomes the strong
must cross an energy barrier that is maximal at the
interaction between ion and protein and allows rapid
(cid:2)
membrane centre. AK ion can move throughout the
conduction in the setting of high selectivity. This leads
inner pore and cavity and still remain mostly to a rate of diffusion of around 108ions per second.
hydrated, owing to the large diameter of these regions.
The role of the inner pore and the cavity is to lower the
electrostatic barrier. The cavity overcomes the electro-
APPENDIX 3.3
static destabilization from the low dielectric bilayer by
THE NERNST EQUATION
simply surrounding an ion with polarizable water.
Another feature that contributes to the stabilization of
the cation at the bilayer centre are the four pore helices
The material in this appendix is adapted from Katz B
which point directly at the centre of the cavity. The
(ed.) (1966) Nerve, Muscle and Synapse (New York:
amino to carboxyl orientation of these helices imposes McGraw-Hill). When V (cid:4)E , a particular ion has an
m ion
a negative electrostatic (cation attractive) potential via
equal tendency to diffuse in one direction according to
the helix dipole effect. These two mechanisms (large
its concentration gradient as to move in the reverse
aqueous cavity and oriented helices) serve to stabilize
direction according to membrane potential. The net
a cation in the hydrophobic membrane interior.
flux of this ion is null, so the current carried by this ion
The selectivity filter that follows, in contrast, is lined is null. V (cid:4)E means that:
m ion
exclusively by polar main-chain atoms. They create a
stack of sequential carbonyl oxygen rings which pro- osmotic work (W o) (cid:4)electrical work (W e). (a)
vide multiple closely spaced binding sites (S) for
The osmotic work required to move one mole of a
cations separated by 0.3–0.4nm. This selectivity filter
particular ion from a compartment where its concen-
(cid:2)
attracts K ions and allows them to move.
tration is low to a compartment when its concentration
is high is equal to the electrical work needed to move
Why are cations permeant and not anions?
one mole of this ion against the membrane potential in
the opposite direction. Here, active diffusion of ions is
As might have been anticipated for a cation channel,
considered instead of passive diffusion. The electrical
both the intracellular and extracellular entryways are
work required to move 1mole of an ion against a
negatively charged by acidic amino acids, that raise the
potential difference E is:
local concentration of cations while lowering the con- ion
centration of anions. W (cid:4)zFE (b)
e ion,
(cid:2) where z is the valence of the transported ion, equal
Why are K ions at least 10,000 times more
(cid:2) to(cid:2)1 for monovalent cations such as Na(cid:2) or K(cid:2) , to(cid:3)1
permeant than Na ions?
for monovalent anions such as Cl(cid:3), and to(cid:2)2 for diva-
The selectivity filter is so narrow that a
K(cid:2)
ion evi- lent cations such as
Ca2(cid:2)
. Fis the Faraday constant. Ffor
dently dehydrates to enter into it and only a single K(cid:2) hydrogen is the charge of one hydrogen atom: F(cid:4)Ne.

44
3. IONIC GRADIENTS, MEMBRANE POTENTIAL AND IONIC CURRENTS
Here N is the Avogadro number, which is 6.022 (cid:5) Equation (c) can be changed to:
1023mol–1(one mole of hydrogen atoms contains 6 (cid:5) 1023
protons and the same number of electrons), and eis the W (cid:4) RT∫ v 1(1/v)dv (cid:4) RT(lnv (cid:3)lnv )
elementary charge of a proton, which is 1.602 (cid:5) 10–19 (cid:4)v 2
RTln(v /v ).
1 2 (d)
coulombs (C). So F(cid:4)96,500C mol(cid:3)1. Therefore zFwith 1 2
z(cid:4)1 is the charge of 1mole of protons or 1mole of By analogy the osmotic work is:
monovalent cations (Na(cid:2) , K(cid:2) ). The charge of one mole W (cid:4)RTln([ion] /[ion]). (e)
of monovalent anions (Cl(cid:3) )is – F(z(cid:4)(cid:3)1); the charge of o e i
1mole of divalent cations (Ca2(cid:2) ) is 2F(z(cid:4)2); etc. From equation (a), W o(cid:4)(cid:3)W e, so from equations (b)
and (e) the Nernst equation is obtained:
The osmotic work required to move 1mole of ions
from a compartment where its concentration is low to RTln([ion] /[ion])(cid:4)zFE
e i ion
a compartment where the concentration is high can be
E (cid:4) (RT/zF) ln([ion] /[ion]). (Nernst)
compared to the work done in compressing 1g equiv- ion e i
alent of an ideal gas. The gas is contained in a cylinder At 20°C, RT/F is about 25mV, and moving from
with a movable piston. Mechanical work to move the Neperian logarithms to decimal ones a factor of 2.3 is
piston is W, calculated from force times distance of dis- needed. Hence:
placement of the piston (δl). The force exerted is equal
E (cid:4) (58/z) log ([ion] /[ion]).
to the pressure p of the gas multiplied by the surface ion 10 e i
area S of the piston. So the work δW done to displace Of course, this description of the E is entirely
the piston is pS δl, which equals p δv. Therefore the based on a physical theory of passive ionio n movements.
work done in compressing a gas from a volume v 1to a Transmembrane flux of ions, however, involves active
volume v 2is: transport of ions as well. For example, the gradients for
Na(cid:2)
and, in particular, for
Ca2(cid:2)
are regulated by com-
W (cid:4) ∫ v 1pdv. (c) plex mechanisms relying on transporters and intracel-
v
2 lular sequestration so that the possibility of predicting
The gas law tells us that pv(cid:4)RT(hence p(cid:4)RT/v), the precise reversal potential of responses mediated by
with R the constant of an ideal gas (R(cid:4)8.314 V C rises in Na(cid:2) or Ca2(cid:2) permeability on the basis of their
K–1mol–1) and Tis the absolute temperature. apparent transmembrane concentrations is limited.

C H A P T E R
4
The voltage-gated channels of
(cid:2)
Na action potentials
The ionic basis for nerve excitation was first elucidated Stim
in the squid giant axon by Hodgkin and Huxley (1952) V
m
using the voltage clamp technique. They made the key
observation that two separate, voltage-dependent cur-
Axon
rents underlie the action potential: an early transient
(cid:2)
inward Na current which depolarizes the membrane,
(cid:2) V(mv)
and a delayed outward K current largely responsible
Depolarization Repolarization
for repolarization. This led to a series of experiments
(cid:2)30
that resulted in a quantitative description of impulse
generation and propagation in the squid axon.
Nearly 30 years later, Sakmann and Neher, using
the patch clamp technique, recorded the activity of
(cid:2) (cid:2)
the voltage-gated Na and K channels responsible
for action potential initiation and propagation. Taking
history backwards, action potentials will be explained Hyperpolarization
from the single channel level to the membrane level. (cid:3)50
(cid:3)70
0 1 2 Time(ms)
4.1 PROPERTIES OF ACTION
POTENTIALS
Stimulation
FIGURE 4.1 Action potential of the giant axon of the squid.
4.1.1 The different types of action potentials Action potential intracellularly recorded in the giant axon of the squid
at resting membrane potential in response to a depolarizing current
The action potential is a sudden and transient depolar- pulse (the extracellular solution is seawater). The different phases of
ization of the membrane. The cells that initiate action the action potential are indicated. Adapted from Hodgkin ALand
Katz B (1949) The effect of sodium ions on the electrical activity of the
potentials are called ‘excitable cells’. Action potentials
giant axon of the squid. J. Physiol.108, 37–77, with permission.
can have different shapes, i.e. different amplitudes and
durations. In neuronal somas and axons, action poten-
tials have a large amplitude and a small duration: these (Figure 4.2b-d). Finally, in some neuronal dendrites
(cid:2)
are the Na -dependent action potentials (Figures 4.1 and and some endocrine cells, action potentials have a
4.2a). In other neuronal cell bodies, heart ventricular cells small amplitude and a long duration: these are the
and axon terminals, the action potentials have a longer
Ca2(cid:2)
-dependent action potentials.
duration with a plateau following the initial peak: Action potentials have common properties; for exam-
these are the
Na(cid:2) /Ca2(cid:2)
-dependent action potentials ple they are all initiated in response to a membrane
45

46 4. THE VOLTAGE-GATED CHANNELS OF Na(cid:2)ACTION POTENTIALS
1 ms
(a) (b)
(cid:2)
50 mV
50 mV
1.0
(cid:3)
Rat node of Ranvier
0 20 ms
Cerebellar Purkinje cell
(c)
(d) a
50 mV
b
100 ms
Heart Purkinje fibre
50 ms
Axon terminal
FIGURE 4.2 Different types of action potentials recorded in excitable cells.
(a)Sodium-dependent action potential intracellularly recorded in a node of Ranvier of a rat nerve fibre. Note
the absence of the hyperpolarization phase flowing the action potential. (b)–(d)Sodium–calcium-dependent
action potentials. Intracellular recording of the complex spike in a cerebellar Purkinje cell in response to climb-
ing fibre stimulation: an initial Na(cid:2)-dependent action potential and a later larger slow potential on which are
superimposed several small Ca2(cid:2)-dependent action potentials. The total duration of this complex spike is
5–7ms. (b)Action potential recorded from axon terminals of Xenopushypothalamic neurons (these axon termi-
nals are located in the neurohypophysis) in control conditions (top) and after adding blockers of Na(cid:2)and K(cid:2)
channels (TTX and TEA, bottom) in order to unmask the Ca2(cid:2)component of the spike (this component has a
larger duration due to the blockade of some of the K(cid:2)channels). (c)Intracellular recording of an action potential
from an acutely dissociated dog heart cell (Purkinje fibre). Trace ‘a’ is recorded when the electrode is outside the
cell and represents the trace 0mV. Trace ‘b’ is recorded when the electrode is inside the cell. The peak amplitude
of the action potential is 75mV and the total duration 400ms. (d)All these action potentials are recorded in
response to an intracellular depolarizing pulse or to the stimulation of afferents. Note the differences in their
durations. Part (a) adapted from Brismar T (1980) Potential clamp analysis of membrane currents in rat myeli-
nated nerve fibres. J. Physiol. 298, 171–184, with permission. Parts (b)–(d) adapted from Coraboeuf E and
Weidmann S (1949) Potentiel de repos et potentiels d’action du muscle cardiaque, mesurés à l’aide d’électrodes
internes. C. R. Soc. Biol.143, 1329–1331; and Eccles JC, Llinas R, Sasaki K (1966) The excitatory synaptic action of
climbing fibres on the Purkinje cells of the cerebellum. J. Physiol.182, 268–296; and Obaid AL, Flores R, Salzberg
BM (1989) Calcium channels that are required for secretion from intact nerve terminals of vertebrates are sensi-
tive toω-conotoxin and relatively insensitive to dihydropyridines. J. Gen. Physiol.93, 715–730; with permission.
depolarization. They also have differences; for example in risetime of the depolarization phase of the action
the type of ions involved, their amplitude, duration, etc. potential gradually and rapidly decreases, until after
8s the current pulse can no longer evoke an action
(cid:2) (cid:2)
4.1.2 Na and K ions participate in the potential (Figure 4.3). Moreover, in control seawater,
action potential of axons tetrodotoxin (TTX), a specific blocker of voltage-gated
(cid:2)
Na channels, completely blocks action potential initi-
The activity of the giant axon of the squid is recorded
ation (Figure 4.4a,c), thus confirming a major role of
with an intracellular electrode (in current clamp; see (cid:2)
Na ions.
Appendix 4.1) in the presence of seawater as the external
solution.
(cid:2)
K ions participate in the repolarization phase of
(cid:2)
Na ions participate in the depolarization phase of the action potential
the action potential
Application of tetraethylammonium chloride (TEA),
(cid:2)
When the extracellular solution is changed from a blocker of K channels, greatly prolongs the duration
(cid:2)
seawater to a Na -free solution, the amplitude and of the action potential of the squid giant axon without

4.2 THE DEPOLARIZATION PHASE OF Na(cid:2)-DEPENDENT ACTION POTENTIALS RESULTS FROM THE TRANSIENT ENTRY OF Na(cid:2)IONS 47
mV 4.1.3 Na(cid:2) -dependent action potentials are all
90 or none and propagate along the axon
1
80 10 with the same amplitude
70
9
60 2 Depolarizing current pulses are applied through the
50 3 intracellular recording electrode, at the level of a neur-
40
4 onal soma or axon. We observe that (i) to a certain level
30 5 of membrane depolarization called the threshold
6
20
potential, only an ohmic passive response is recorded
10 7
(Figure 4.5a,right); (ii) when the membrane is depolar-
0 8
ized just above threshold, an action potential is recorded.
(cid:3)10
(cid:3)20 Then, increasing the intensity of the stimulating current
0 1.0 2.0 3.0 ms pulse does not increase the amplitude of the action
FIGURE 4.3 The action potential of the squid giant axon is potential (Figure 4.5a, left). The action potential is all
abolished in a Na(cid:2)-free external solution. or none.
(1) Control action potential recorded in sea water; (2)–(8) recordings Once initiated, the action potential propagates along
taken at the following times after the application of a dextrose solution the axon with a speed varying from 1 to 100ms(cid:3)1accord-
(Na-free solution): 2.30, 4.62, 5.86, 6.10, 7.10 and 8.11s; (9) recording
ingto the type of axon. Intracellular recordings at vary-
taken 9s after reapplication of seawater; (10) recording taken at 90
ing distances from the soma show that the amplitude of
and 150s after reapplication of seawater; traces are superimposed.
From Hodgkin ALand Katz B (1949) The effect of sodium ions on the the action potential does not attenuate: the action poten-
electrical activity of the giant axon of the squid. J. Physiol. 108, 37–77, tial propagates without decrement (Figure 4.5b).
with permission.
(cid:2)
(b) 4.1.4 Questions about the Na -dependent
action potential
• What are the structural and functional properties of
(cid:2) (cid:2)
the Na and K channels of the action potential?
(Sections 4.2 and 4.3)
(cid:2)TEA
• What represents the threshold potential for action
(a)
potential initiation? (Section 4.4)
• Why is the action potential, all or none? (Section 4.4)
• What are the mechanisms of action potential
propagation? (Section 4.4)
Control
4.2 THE DEPOLARIZATION PHASE
(cid:2)TTX
(cid:2)
50 mV OF Na -DEPENDENT ACTION
(c)
POTENTIALS RESULTS FROM THE
(cid:2)
TRANSIENT ENTRY OF Na IONS
FIGURE 4.4 Effects of tetrodotoxin (TTX) and tetraethylammo- THROUGH VOLTAGE-GATED Na(cid:2)
nium chloride (TEA) on the action potential of the squid giant axon. CHANNELS
(a)Control action potential. (b)TEAapplication lengthens the action
potential (left), which then has to be observed on a different time
scale (right trace). (c) TTX totally abolishes the initiation of the 4.2.1 The Na(cid:2) channel consists of a principal
action potential. Adapted from Tasaki I and Hagiwara S (1957) large α-subunit with four internal
Demonstration of two stable potential states in the squid giant axon
homologous repeats and auxiliary
under tetraethylammonium chloride. J. Gen. Physiol. 40, 859–885,
β-subunits
with permission.
The primary structures of the Electrophorus electro-
(cid:2)
plax Na channel, that of the rat brain, heart and skele-
changing the resting membrane potential. The action tal muscles have been elucidated by cloning and
potential treated with TEAhas an initial peak followed sequence analysis of the complementary cDNAs. The
by a plateau (Figure 4.4a,b) and the prolongation is Na(cid:2) channel in all these structures consists of an α-
sometimes 100-fold or more. subunit of approximately 2000 amino acids (260kDa),

48 4. THE VOLTAGE-GATED CHANNELS OF Na(cid:2)ACTION POTENTIALS
(a) All or None
V (mV)
0
(cid:3)40
Threshold
(cid:3)80
0.2
I (nA)
stim 0
0 5 Time (ms) 0 5
(b) Time t Time t (cid:2) (cid:4)t
stim
record record
Node 1 Node 3
FIGURE 4.5 Properties of the Na(cid:2)-dependent action potential.
The response of the membrane to depolarizing current pulses of different amplitudes is recorded with an intra-
cellular electrode. Upper traces are the voltage traces, bottom traces are the current traces. Above 0.2nAan axon
potential is initiated. Increasing the current pulse amplitude does not increase the action potential amplitude
(left). With current pulses of smaller amplitudes, no action potential is initiated. (b)An action potential is initi-
ated in the soma–initial segment by a depolarizing current pulse (stim). Intracellular recording electrodes
inserted along the axon record the action potential at successive nodes at successive times. See text for further
explanations.
composed of four homologous domains (I to IV) sepa- this led to suggestions that the S4 segments serve as
rated by surface loops of different lengths. Within each voltage sensors (see Section 4.2.7).
domain there are six segments forming six putative The α-subunit of mammals is associated with one or
transmembrane α-helices (S1 to S6) and a hairpin-like P two smaller auxiliary subunits named β-subunits. They
loop also called re-entrant pore loop between S5 and S6 are small proteins of about 200 amino acid residues
(Figure 4.6a). The four homologous domains probably (33–36kDa), with a substantial N-terminal domain,
form a pseudo-tetrameric structure whose central part a single putative membrane spanning segment and
is the permeation pathway (Figure 4.6b). Parts of the a C-terminal intracellular domain.
α-subunit contributing to pore formation have been The α-subunit mRNAisolated from rat brain or the
identified by site-directed mutagenesis. α-subunit RNAs transcribed from cloned cDNAs from
Each domain contains a unique segment, the S4 seg- a rat brain are sufficient to direct the synthesis of func-
(cid:2)
ment, with positively charged residues (arginine or tional Na channels when injected into oocytes. These
lysine) at every third position with mostly non-polar results establish that the protein structures necessary
residues intervening between them (see Figure 4.15a). for voltage-gating and ion conductance are contained
This structure of the S4 segment is strikingly conserved within the α-subunit itself. However, the properties of
(cid:2) (cid:2)
in all the types of Na channels analyzed so far and these channels are not identical to native Na channels

4.2 THE DEPOLARIZATION PHASE OF Na(cid:2)-DEPENDENT ACTION POTENTIALS RESULTS FROM THE TRANSIENT ENTRY OF Na(cid:2)IONS 49
(cid:5)
(a)
I II III IV
Out
S1S2S3S4S5 P S6 S1S2S3S4S5 P S6 S1S2S3S4S5 P S6 S1S2S3S4S5 P S6
In
I
F
M
NH 2(cid:2) COO(cid:3)
(b)
Na(cid:2)
II
I III
IV
FIGURE 4.6 Aschematic drawing of the voltage-gated Na(cid:2)channel α-subunit.
(a)Cylinders represent putative membrane-spanning segments, Pthe Ploops and IFM the critical motif of the
fast inactivation particle on the cytoplasmic linker connecting domains III and IV. The lengths that are shown
for the N and C termini and the interdomain cytoplasmic loops are consistent with the Na 1.2 mammalian
v
Na(cid:2)channel but these linkers (except for that between III and IV) vary greatly in length and sequence among
the different Na(cid:2)channel isoforms. (b)Diagram of the pseudo-tetrameric structure whose central part is the
permeation pathway. Drawing (a) adapted from Goldin A(2002) The evolution of voltage-gated Na(cid:2)channels.
J. Exp. Biol. 205, 575–584, with permission.
as it has been shown that the auxiliary β-subunits play The activity of a single Na(cid:2) channel was first recorded
a role in the targeting and stabilization of the α-subunit by Sigworth and Neher in 1980 from rat muscle cells
in the plasma membrane, its sensitivity to voltage and with the patch clamp technique (cell-attached patch;
rate of inactivation. see Appendix 4.3).
(cid:2)
The nomenclature of all Na voltage-gated channels It must be explained that the experimenter does not
is the following: Na to indicate the principal permeating know, before recording it, which type of channel(s) is
v
(cid:2)
ion (Na ) and the principal physiological regulator in the patch of membrane isolated under the tip of the
(v for voltage), followed by a number that indicates the pipette. He or she can only increase the chance of
(cid:2)
gene subfamily (currently Na 1 is the only subfamily). recording a Na channel, for example, by studying a
v
The number following the decimal point identifies the membrane where this type of channel is frequently
specific channel isoform (e.g. Na 1.1). At present, nine expressed and by pharmacologically blocking the other
v
functional isoforms have been identified. types of channels that could be activated together
(cid:2) (cid:2)
with the Na channels (voltage-gated K channels are
blocked by TEA). The recorded channel is then identi-
4.2.2 Membrane depolarization favours
(cid:2) fied by its voltage dependence, reversal potential, uni-
conformational change of the Na
tary conductance, ionic permeability, mean open time,
channel towards the open state; the
(cid:2)
(cid:2) etc. Finally, the number of Na channels in the patch of
Na channel then quickly inactivates
membrane cannot be predicted. Even when pipettes
(cid:2)
The function of the Na channel is to transduce rapidly with small tips are used, the probability of recording
(cid:2)
membrane depolarization into an entry of Na ions. more than one channel can be high because of the type

50 4. THE VOLTAGE-GATED CHANNELS OF Na(cid:2)ACTION POTENTIALS
of membrane patched. For this reason, very few
(cid:2)
recordings of single native Na channels have been
(cid:2)
performed. The number of Na channels in a patch is v
140 o
estimated from recordings where the membrane is Na v c
strongly depolarized in order to increase to its maximum Embryonic e e
muscle cell
the probability of opening the voltage-gated channels i Cell attached
present in the patch.
(cid:2)
Voltage-gated Na channels of the skeletal (a)
muscle fibre
(cid:2) V
A series of recordings obtained from a single Na
channel in response to a 40mV depolarizing step given
i 1
Na
every second is shown in Figure 4.7a andc.The hold- 2
ing potential is around(cid:3)70mV (remember that in the 3
4
cell attached configuration, the membrane potential
5
can only be estimated). A physiological extracellular 5 pA
6
(cid:2)
concentration of Na ions is present in the pipette. 7
At holding potential, no variations in the current 8
9
traces are recorded. After the onset of the depolarizing
step, unitary Na(cid:2) currents of varying durations but of (b)
i
the same amplitude are recorded (lines 1, 2, 4, 5, 7 and Na
0.2 nA
8) or not recorded (lines 3, 6 and 9). This means that six
(cid:2) 10ms
times out of nine, the Na channel has opened in
(cid:2)
response to membrane depolarization. The Na cur-
rent has a rectangular shape and is downward. By (c)
convention, inward currents of (cid:2) ions (cations) are i 1
represented as downward (inward means that (cid:2) ions Na 2
enter the cell; see Section 3.4). The histogram of the 3
(cid:2) 4
Na current amplitude recorded in response to a 40mV 5 pA
5
depolarizing step gives a mean amplitude for i Na of 6
around(cid:3)1.6pA(see Appendix 4.3). 7
It is interesting to note that once the channel has 8
9
opened, there is a low probability that it will reopen
during the depolarization period. Moreover, even
when the channel does not open at the beginning of the
(cid:2) C I
step, the frequency of appearance of Na currents later 0 pA
(cid:2)
in the depolarization is very low; i.e. the Na channel Opens
inactivates. O i inward
Inactivates
(cid:2)
Rat brain Na channels
FIGURE 4.7 Single Na(cid:2) channel openings in response to a
(cid:2) depolarizing step (muscle cell).
The activity of rat brain Na channels has been stud-
The activity of the Na(cid:2) channel is recorded in patch clamp (cell-
iedin cerebellar Purkinje cells in culture. Each trace of
attached patch) from an embryonic muscle cell. (a) Nine successive
(cid:2)
Figure 4.8a andcshows the unitary Na currents (i Na) recordings of single channel openings (i Na) in response to a 40mV
recorded during a 20ms membrane depolarization to depolarizing pulse (V trace) given at 1s intervals from a holding poten-
(cid:3)40mV (test potential) from a holding potential of tial 10mV more hyperpolarized than the resting membrane potential.
(cid:3)90mV. Rectangular inward currents occur most fre- (b)Averaged inward Na(cid:2)current from 300 elementary Na(cid:2)currents as
in (a). (c)The same recordings as in (a) are redrawn in order to explain
quently at the beginning of the depolarizing step but
more clearly the different states of the channel. On the bottom line one
can also be found at later times (Figure 4.8a, line 2). opening is enlarged. C, closed state; O, open state; I, inactivated state.
(cid:2)
The histogram of the Na current amplitudes recorded The solution bathing the extracellular side of the patch or intrapipette
at (cid:3)40mV test potential gives a mean amplitude for solution contains (in mM): 140 NaCl, 1.4 KCl, 2.0 MgCl 2, 1 CaCl 2and 20
i of around (cid:3)2pA(Figure 4.8d). Events near (cid:3)4pA HEPES at pH 7.4. TEA5mM is added to block K(cid:2)channels and bun-
Na garotoxin to block acetylcholine receptors. Adapted from Sigworth FJ
correspond to double openings, meaning that at least and Neher E (1980) Single Na(cid:2)channel currents observed in rat mus-
two channels are present in the patch. cle cells. Nature287, 447–449, with permission.

4.2 THE DEPOLARIZATION PHASE OF Na(cid:2)-DEPENDENT ACTION POTENTIALS RESULTS FROM THE TRANSIENT ENTRY OF Na(cid:2)IONS 51
(a)
i
Na
i
Na 1
(d) 120
80
40
0
(cid:3)1 (cid:3)2 (cid:3)3 (cid:3)4
Amplitude (pA)
flow through the pore) as in the closed state but the
The unitary current has a rectangular shape
channel cannot reopen immediately (which differs
The rectangular shape of the unitary current means from the closed state). The inactivated channel is
(cid:2)
that when the Na channel opens, the unitary current refractory to opening unless the membrane repolarizes
is nearly immediately maximal. The unitary current to allow it to return to the closed (resting) state.
then stays constant: the channel stays open for a time In other recordings, such as that of Figure 4.8a and
(cid:2)
which varies; finally the unitary current goes back to c, the Na channel seems to reopen once or twice
zero though the membrane is still depolarized. The before inactivating. This may result from the presence
channel may not reopen (Figure 4.7a,c) as it is in an of two (as here) or more channels in the patch so that
inactivated state (I) (Figure 4.7c, bottom trace). After the unitary currents recorded do not correspond to the
being opened by a depolarization, the channel does same channel. It may also result from a slower inacti-
not go back to the closed state but inactivates. In that vation rate of the channel recorded, which in fact opens,
(cid:2)
state, the pore of the channel is closed (no Na ions closes, reopens and then inactivates.
stniop
ataD
(cid:3)40 (c)
C I
V
H
= (cid:3)90 1 0 pA
Opens
O O
Inactivates
C I
2
2
1 Na
O O O
3
140 Na
i
e
C I Outside-out
3
2 pA
(b)
5 ms
O O
I
Na
FIGURE 4.8 Single-channel activity of a voltage-gated Na(cid:2)channel from rat brain neurons.
The activity of a Na(cid:2)channel of a cerebellar Purkinje cell in culture is recorded in patch clamp (outside-out
patch) in response to successive depolarizing steps to (cid:3)40mV from a holding potential V (cid:6)(cid:3)90mV. (a)The
H
20ms step (upper trace) evokes rectangular inward unitary currents (i ). (b)Average current calculated from
Na
all the sweeps which had active Na(cid:2)channels within a set of 25 depolarizations. (c)Interpretative drawing on
an enlarged scale of the recordings in (a). (d)Histogram of elementary amplitudes for recordings as in (a). The
continuous line corresponds to the best fit of the data to a single Gaussian distribution. C, closed state; O, open
state; I, inactivated state. The solution bathing the outside face of the patch contains (in mM): 140 NaCl,
2.5 KCl, 1 CaCl2, 1 MgCl2, 10 HEPES. The solution bathing the inside of the patch or intrapipette solution con-
tains (in mM): 120 CsF, 10 CsCl, 1 NaCl, 10 EGTA-Cs(cid:2), 10 HEPES-Cs(cid:2). Cs(cid:2)ions are in the pipette instead of
K(cid:2)ions in order to block K(cid:2)channels. Adapted from Gähwiler BH and Llano I (1989) Sodium and potassium
conductances in somatic membranes of rat Purkinje cells from organotypic cerebellar cultures. J. Physiol. 417,
105–122, with permission.

52 4. THE VOLTAGE-GATED CHANNELS OF Na(cid:2)ACTION POTENTIALS
The unitary current is carried by a few Na(cid:2) ions 4.2.4 The i (cid:3)V relation is linear: the Na(cid:2)
Na
(cid:2) channel has a constant unitary
How many Na ions enter through a single channel?
conductance γ
Knowing that in the preceding example, the unitary Na
Na(cid:2) current has a mean amplitude of (cid:3)1.6pAfor 1ms, When the activity of a single Na(cid:2) channel is now
(cid:2)
the number of Na ions flowing through one channel recorded at different test potentials, we observe that
during 1ms is
1.6(cid:7)10(cid:3)12/(1.6(cid:7)10(cid:3)19(cid:7)103)(cid:6)10,000
the amplitude of the inward unitary current dimin-
Na(cid:2)
ions (since
1pA(cid:6)1pCs(cid:3)1
and the elementary ishes as the membrane is further and further depolar-
charge of one electron is 1.6(cid:7)10(cid:3)19C). This number, 104 ized (see Figure 4.11a). In other words, the net entry of
ions, is negligible compared with the number of Na(cid:2) Na(cid:2) ions through a single channel diminishes as the
i ko nn os
w
i in
n
gt h the ai tn 1t r mac oe ll elu rl ea pr
r
em see nd ti su 6m (cid:7): i 1f
0
2[N 3ia o(cid:2) n] si ,(cid:6) th1 e4 nm umM -, m ploem ttib nr ga n the
e
d ae mpo pl la itr uiz de es .
o
T fh the ei N ua(cid:3) niV tarr yel a cuti ro rn
e
nis
t
o (ibta )i n ve ed
rs
b uy
s
ber of Na(cid:2) ions per litre is 6(cid:7)1023(cid:7)14(cid:7)10(cid:3)3(cid:6)1022 membrane potential (V ). It is linear betweenNa (cid:3)50mV
ions
l(cid:3)1.
In a neuronal cell body or a section of axon, the and 0mV (Figure
4.9a).m
For membrane potentials more
volume is of the order of 10(cid:3)12to 10(cid:3)13litres. Then the hyperpolarized than(cid:3)50mV, there are no values of i
number of Na(cid:2) ions is around 109to 1010. since the channel rarely opens or does not open at aN lla .
Quantitative data for potentials more depolarized than
(cid:2)
The Na channel fluctuates between the closed, 0mV are not available.
open and inactivated states The critical point of the current–voltage relation is the
membrane potential for which the current is zero; i.e. the
(cid:2)
C O I reversal potential of the current (E ). If only Na ions
rev
(cid:2)
flow through the Na channel, the reversal potential is
equal to E . From(cid:3)50mV to E , i is inward and its
Na rev Na
amplitude decreases. This results from the decrease of
where C is the channel in the closed state, O in the
the Na(cid:2) driving force (V (cid:3)E ) as the membrane
open state and I in the inactivated state. Both C and I m Na
(cid:2)
approaches the reversal potential for Na ions. For
states are non-conducting states. The C to O transition
membrane potentials more depolarized than E , i is
is triggered by membrane depolarization. The O to I rev Na
transition is due to an intrinsic property of the
Na(cid:2) now outward (not shown). Above E rev, the amplitude of
(cid:2)
the outward Na current progressively increases as the
channel. The I to C transition occurs when the mem-
(cid:2)
driving force for the exit of Na ions increases.
brane repolarizes or is already repolarized. In sum-
mary, the
Na(cid:2)
channel opens when the membrane is
The linear i Na(cid:3)Vrelation is described by the equation
i (cid:6)γ (V (cid:3)E ), where V is the test potential, E
depolarized, stays open during a mean open time of Na Na m Na m Na
is the reversal potential of the Na(cid:2) current, and γ is
less than 1ms, and then usually inactivates. Na
(cid:2)
the conductance of a single Na channel (unitary con-
(cid:2) ductance). The value of γ is given by the slope of the
4.2.3 The time during which the Na channel Na
linear i /Vcurve. It has a constant value at any given
stays open varies around an average Na
value, τ , called the mean open time membrane potential. This value varies between 5 and
o 18pS depending on the preparation.
In Figures 4.7a and 4.8a we can observe that the
(cid:2)
periods during which the channel stays open, t , are 4.2.5 The probability of the Na channel
o
variable. The mean open time of the channel, τ , at a being in the open state increases with
o
given potential is obtained from the frequency his- depolarization to a maximal level
togram of the different t at this potential. When this
o An important observation at the single channel level
distribution can be fitted by a single exponential, its time
is that the more the membrane is depolarized, the
constant provides the value of τ o (see Appendix 4.3). higher is the probability that the Na(cid:2) channel will
The functional significance of this value is the follow-
open. This observation can be made from two types of
ing: during a time equal to τ the channel has a high
o experiments:
probability of staying open.
For example, the Na(cid:2) channel of the skeletal muscle • The activity of a single Na(cid:2) channel is recorded in
fibre stays open during a mean open time of 0.7ms. For patch clamp (cell-attached patch). Each depolarizing
the rat brain Na(cid:2) channel of cerebellar Purkinje cells, step is repeated several times and the number of
(cid:2)
the distribution of the durations of the unitary currents times the Na channel opens is observed (Figure
recorded at(cid:3)32mV can be fitted with a single expo- 4.10a). With depolarizing steps to (cid:3)70mV from a
nential with a time constant of 0.43ms (τ (cid:6)0.43ms). holding potential of (cid:3)120mV, the channel very rarely
o

4.2 THE DEPOLARIZATION PHASE OF Na(cid:2)-DEPENDENT ACTION POTENTIALS RESULTS FROM THE TRANSIENT ENTRY OF Na(cid:2)IONS 53
(a) Outward i overlapping currents of two or three Na(cid:2) channels
Na
(cid:2)
can be observed, meaning that this number of Na
channels open with close delays in response to the
Test potential (mV)
(cid:3)100 (cid:3)50 step (not shown).
80
From the recordings of Figure 4.10a, we can observe
(cid:2)
0.5 60 that the probability of the Na channel being in the
(cid:8) open state varies with the value of the test potential. It
Na
1.0 40 also varies with time during the depolarizing step:
openings occur more frequently at the beginning of the
20 (cid:2)
1.5 step. The open probability of Na channels is voltage-
and time-dependent. By averaging a large number of
0
(cid:3)0.5 (cid:3)1.0 (cid:3)1.5 records obtained at each test potential, the open prob-
(cid:2)
ability (p) of the Na channel recorded can be obtained
t
at each time t of the step (Figure 4.10b). We observe
from these curves that after 4–6ms the probability of
(cid:2) the Na channel being in the open state is very low,
(cid:2) even with large depolarizing steps: the Na channel
inactivates in 4–6ms. When we compare now the open
probabilities at the different test potentials, we observe
(cid:2)
that the probability of the Na channel being in the
open state at time t(cid:6)2ms increases with the ampli-
tude of the depolarizing step.
(cid:2) 4.2.6 The macroscopic Na current (I ) has
Na
a steep voltage dependence of activation
and inactivates within a few milliseconds
(cid:2)
The macroscopic Na current, I , is the sum of the
Na
unitary currents, i , flowing through all the open
Na (cid:2) Na channels of the recorded membrane
At the axon initial segment or at nodes of Ranvier,
(cid:2) there are NNa channels that can be activated. We have
(cid:2)
seen that the unitary Na current flowing through a
(cid:2)
single Na channel has a rectangular shape. What is the
(cid:2) time course of the macroscopic Na current, I ?
Na
(cid:2) If we assume that the Na channels in one cell are
identical and function independently, the sum of many
(cid:2)
recordings from the same Na channel should show
(cid:2)
the same properties as the macroscopic Na current
measured from thousands of channels with the voltage
clamp technique. In Figure 4.7b, an average of 300 uni-
(cid:2)
tary Na currents elicited by a 40mV depolarizing pulse
is shown. For a given potential, the ‘averaged’ inward
(cid:2)
Na current has a fast rising phase and presents a peak
at the time t(cid:6)1.5ms. The peak corresponds to the time
(cid:2)
opens; and if it does, the time spent in the open state when most of the Na channels are opened at each trial.
is very short. In contrast, with depolarizing steps to Then the averaged current decays with time because
(cid:3)40mV, the Na(cid:2) channels open for each trial. the Na(cid:2) channel has a low probability of being in the
(cid:2)
• The activity of two or three Na channels is open state later in the step (owing to the inactivation of
(cid:2) (cid:2)
recorded in patch clamp (cell-attached patch). In the Na channel). At each trial, the Na channel does
response to depolarizing steps of small amplitude, not inactivate exactly at the same time, which explains
(cid:2) (cid:2)
Na channels do not open or only one Na channel the progressive decay of the averaged macroscopic
(cid:2) (cid:2)
opens at a time. With larger depolarizing steps, the Na current. Asimilar averaged Na current is shown
)Ap(
edutilpmA
snoitavresbO
2.0
Amplitude (pA)
Inward i
Na
(b)
[Na(cid:2)] = 140 mM extra e
(cid:3)40 mV
intra [Na(cid:2)] = 14 mM i
[ ]
(V (cid:3) E )
m Na
Na(cid:2) channel
extra
0 mV
intra
(V (cid:3) E )[ ] m Na
FIGURE 4.9 The single-channel current/voltage (i /V) relation
Na
is linear.
(a)The activity of the rat type II Na(cid:2)channel expressed in Xenopus
oocytes from cDNAis recorded in patch clamp (cell-attached patch).
Plot of the unitary current amplitude versus test potential: each point
represents the mean of 20–200 unitary current amplitudes measured
at one potential (left) as shown at (cid:3)32mV (right). The relation is linear
between test potentials (cid:3)50 and 0mV (holding potential(cid:6)(cid:3)90mV).
The slope is γ (cid:6)19pS. (b)Drawings of an open voltage-gated Na(cid:2)
Na
channel to explain the direction and amplitude of the net flux of Na(cid:2)
ions at two test potentials ((cid:3)40 and 0mV). [], force due to the concen-
tration gradient across the membrane; , force due to the electric
gradient; V(cid:3) E ,driving force. The solution bathing the extracellular
Na
side of the patch or intrapipette solution contains (in mM): 115 NaCl,
2.5 KCl, 1.8 CaCl2, 10 HEPES. Plot (a) adapted from Stühmer W,
Methfessel C, Sakmann B et al.(1987) Patch clamp characterization of
sodium channels expressed from rat brain cDNA. Eur. Biophys. J.14,
131–138, with permission.

54 4. THE VOLTAGE-GATED CHANNELS OF Na(cid:2)ACTION POTENTIALS
(a)
Time (ms)
5 10 15
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.1
(cid:2)
in Figure 4.8b. The averaged current does not have a The averaged macroscopic Na current has a time
(cid:2) (cid:2)
rectangular shape because the Na channel does not course similar to that of the recorded macroscopic Na
open with the same delay and does not inactivate at current from the same type of cell at the same potential.
(cid:2)
the same time at each trial. However, the averaged current from 300 Na channels
)t(p
)t(p
)t(p
)t(p
)t(p
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14
Time (ms)
Time (ms)
5 10 15
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14
Time (ms)
Time (ms)
5 10 15
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14
Time (ms)
Time (ms)
5 10 15
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14
Time (ms)
Time (ms)
5 10 15
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14
Time (ms)
)Ap(
I
0
(cid:3)2
(cid:3)4
)Ap(
I
0
(cid:3)2
(cid:3)4
)Ap(
I
0
(cid:3)2
(cid:3)4
)Ap(
I
0
(cid:3)2
(cid:3)4
)Ap(
I
(b)
140 NaCI
e
(cid:3)120 e
i Cell-attached
(cid:3)70 (cid:3)70
(cid:3)60
(cid:3)60
(cid:3)50
(cid:3)50
(cid:3)40
(cid:3)40
0
(cid:3)2
(cid:3)4 (cid:3)30
(cid:3)30
FIGURE 4.10 The open probability of the voltage-gated Na(cid:2)channel is voltage- and time-dependent.
Single Na(cid:2)channel activity recorded in a mammalian neuroblastoma cell in patch clamp (cell-attached patch).
(a)In response to a depolarizing step to the indicated potentials from a holding potential of (cid:3)120mV, unitary
inward currents are recorded. (b)Ensemble of averages of single-channel openings at the indicated voltages; 64
to 2000 traces are averaged at each voltage to obtain the time-dependent open probability of a channel (p ) in
(t)
response to a depolarization. The open probability at time t is calculated according to the equation:
p(t)(cid:6)I /Ni , where I is the average current at time tat a given voltage, Nis the number of channels (i.e.
Na(t) Na Na(t)
the number of averaged recordings of single channel activity) and i is the unitary current at a given voltage. At
Na
(cid:3)30mV the open probability is maximum. The channels inactivate in 4ms. Adapted from Aldrich RW and
Steven CF (1987) Voltage-dependent gating of sodium channels from mammalian neuroblastoma cells. J.
Neurosci.7, 418–431, with permission.

4.2 THE DEPOLARIZATION PHASE OF Na(cid:2)-DEPENDENT ACTION POTENTIALS RESULTS FROM THE TRANSIENT ENTRY OF Na(cid:2)IONS 55
still presents some angles in its time course. In con- • I changes polarity for V more depolarized than
Na m
(cid:2)
trast, the macroscopic recorded Na current is smooth. E : it is now an outward current whose amplitude
rev
(cid:2)
The more numerous are the Na channels opened increases with the depolarization (Figure 4.10b).
by the depolarizing step, the smoother is the total
(cid:2) It is important to note that membrane potentials
Na current. The value of I at each time tat a given
Na more depolarized than (cid:2)20mV are non-physiological.
potential is:
I (cid:6)Np i Activation and inactivation curves: the
Na (t)Na
threshold potential
(cid:2)
where Nis the number of Na channels in the recorded
membrane and p is the open probability at time t of Activation rate is the rate at which a macroscopic
(t)
(cid:2)
the Na channel; it depends on the membrane poten- current turns on in response to a depolarizing voltage
(cid:2)
tial and on the channel opening and inactivating rate step. The Na current is recorded in a voltage clamp
(cid:2)
constants. i is the unitary Na current and Np is the from a node of rabbit nerve. Depolarizing steps from
Na (t)
number of Na(cid:2) channels open at time t. (cid:3)70mV to (cid:2)20mV are applied from a holding potential
of (cid:3)80mV. When the ratio of the peak current at each
test potential to the maximal peak current (I /I )
The I (cid:3)Vrelation is bell-shaped though the Na Namax
Na is plotted against test potential, the activation curve of
i (cid:3)Vrelation is linear
Na I can be visualized. The distribution is fitted by a sig-
Na
We have seen that the amplitude of the unitary Na(cid:2) moidal curve (Figure 4.12b). In this preparation, the
current decreases linearly with depolarization (see threshold of Na(cid:2) channel activation is (cid:3)60mV. At
Figure 4.9a). In contrast, the I Na(cid:3)V relation is not lin- (cid:3)40mV, I Na is already maximal (I Na/I Namax(cid:6)1). This
ear. The macroscopic Na(cid:2) current is recorded from a steepness of activation is a characteristic of the voltage-
(cid:2)
myelinated rabbit nerve with the double electrode gated Na channels.
voltage clamp technique. When the amplitude of the Inactivation of a current is the decay of this current
peak Na(cid:2) current is plotted against membrane poten- during a maintained depolarization. To study inactiva-
tial, it has a clear bell shape (Figures 4.11 and4.12a). tion, the membrane is held at varying holding poten-
Analysis of each trace from the smallest depolariz- tials and a depolarizing step to a fixed value is applied
ing step to the largest shows that: where I Na is maximal (0mV for example). The ampli-
(cid:2)
tude of the peak Na current is plotted against the
• For small steps, the peak current amplitude is small holding potential. I begins to inactivate at (cid:3)90mV
Na
(0.2nA) and has a slow time to peak (1ms). At these and is fully inactivated at (cid:3)50mV. Knowing that the
(cid:2)
potentials the Na driving force is strong but the
resting membrane potential in this preparation is
(cid:2)
Na channels have a low probability of opening around (cid:3)80mV, some of the Na(cid:2) channels are already
(Figure 4.11a). Therefore, I is small since it
Na inactivated at rest.
represents the current through a small number of
(cid:2)
open Na channels. Moreover, the small number of (cid:2)
(cid:2) Ionic selectivity of the Na channel
activated Na channels open with a delay since the
depolarization is just subliminal. This explains the To compare the permeability of the Na(cid:2) channel to
slow time to peak. several monovalent cations, the macroscopic current
• As the depolarizing steps increase in amplitude is recorded at different membrane potentials in the
(to (cid:3)42/(cid:3)35mV), the amplitude of I Naincreases to presence of external Na(cid:2) ions and when all the exter-
a maximum ((cid:3)3nA) and the time to peak decreases nal Na(cid:2) are replaced by a test cation. Lithium is as
to a minimum (0.2ms). Larger depolarizations permeant as sodium but K(cid:2) ions are weakly permeant
increase the probability of the Na(cid:2) channel being in (P /P (cid:6)0.048). Therefore, Na(cid:2) channels are highly
K Na
the open state and shorten the delay of opening selective for Na(cid:2) ions and only 4% of the current is
(see Figure 4.10). Therefore, though the amplitude carried by K(cid:2) ions (Figure 4.13).
of i decreases between (cid:3)63 and (cid:3)35mV, the
Na
amplitude of I increases owing to the large increase (cid:2)
Na Tetrodotoxin is a selective open Na
(cid:2)
of open Na channels.
channel blocker
• After this peak, the amplitude of I decreases to
Na
zero since the open probability does not increase Alarge number of biological toxins can modify the
(cid:2)
enough to compensate for the decrease of i . The properties of the Na channels. One of these, tetrodo-
Na
reversal potential of I is the same as that of i toxin (TTX), which is found in the liver and ovaries of
Na Na
since it depends only on the extracellular and intra- the pufferfishes, (tetrodon) totally abolishes the current
(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
cellular concentrations of Na ions. through most of the Na channels (TTX sensitive Na

56 4. THE VOLTAGE-GATED CHANNELS OF Na(cid:2)ACTION POTENTIALS
(a) Test potential (mV) (b) Outward
l
Na
(cid:3)63
Inward
(cid:3)56
(c)
)An(
I
aN
(cid:3)50 mV
(cid:3)49
(cid:3)40 mV
0 5 10
Time (ms)
(cid:3)42
(cid:3)35
Activation
(cid:3)30
Inactivation
(cid:3)28
Peak Na(cid:2) current
(cid:3)21
V.clamp
V
C
Axon
(cid:3)80
Node
FIGURE 4.11 Voltage dependence of the macroscopic voltage-gated Na(cid:2)current.
The macroscopic voltage-gated Na(cid:2)current recorded in a node of a rabbit myelinated nerve in voltage clamp
conditions. (a)Depolarizingsteps from (cid:3)70mV to (cid:3)21mV from a holding potential of (cid:3)80mV evoke macro-
scopic Na(cid:2)currents (I ) with different time courses and peak amplitudes. The test potential is on the right.
Na
Bottom trace is the voltage trace. (b)The traces in (a) are superimposed and current responses to depolarizing
steps from (cid:3)14 to (cid:2)55mV are added. The outward current traces are recorded when the test potential is
beyond the reversal potential ((cid:2)30mV in this preparation). (c)I recorded at (cid:3)30mV. The rising phase of I
Na Na
corresponds to activation of the Na(cid:2)channels and the decrease of I corresponds to progressive inactivation
Na
of the open Na(cid:2)channels. The extracellular solution contains (in mM): 154 NaCl, 2.2 CaCl, 5.6 KCl; pH 7.4.
2
Adapted from Chiu SY, Ritchie JM, Bogart RB, Stagg D (1979) Aquantitative description of membrane currents
from a rabbit myelinatednerve. J. Physiol.292, 149–166, with permission.
(cid:2) (cid:2)
channels) (Figure 4.4). However, some Na channels Asingle point mutation of the rat brain Na channel
are resistant to TTX such as those from the pufferfishes. type II, which changes the glutamic acid residue 387 to
TTX has a binding site supposed to be located near the glutamine (E387Q) in the repeat I, renders the channel
extracellular mouth of the pore. insensitive to concentrations of TTX up to tens of

4.2 THE DEPOLARIZATION PHASE OF Na(cid:2)-DEPENDENT ACTION POTENTIALS RESULTS FROM THE TRANSIENT ENTRY OF Na(cid:2)IONS 57
(a)
2 Channels open and
driving force diminishes
1
Voltage (mV)
0
0
(cid:3)1 Driving force diminishes
and reverses
(cid:3)2
(cid:3)3
(cid:3)4
(b) l/l max
Inactivation 1.0 Activation
curve curve
0.5
(cid:3)120 (cid:3)80 (cid:3)40
significantly affected, except for a reduction in the
amplitude of the inward current at all potentials tested.
All these results suggest that the link between segments
(cid:2)
micromolars. Xenopus oocytes are injected with the S5 and S6 in repeat I of the rat brain Na channel is in
wild-type mRNAor the mutant mRNAand the whole close proximity to the channel mouth.
(cid:2)
cell Na currents are recorded with the double-electrode Comparison of the predicted protein sequences of the
voltage clamp technique. TTX sensitivity is assessed skeletal muscle sodium channels show that pufferfish
(cid:2)
by perfusing TTX-containing external solutions and by Na channels have accumulated several unique substi-
(cid:2)
measuring the peak of the whole-cell inward Na cur- tutions in the otherwise highly conserved pore loop
rent (the peak means the maximal amplitude of the regions of the four domains. Among these substitutions,
(cid:2)
inward Na current measured on the I /V relation). some are associated with TTX resistance as assessed
Na
The dose-response curves of Figure 4.14 show that with path clamp recordings. What advantages does TTX
1μM of TTX completely abolishes the wild-type Na(cid:2) resistance offer pufferfishes? Amain advantage is that
(cid:2)
current, but has no effect on the mutant Na current. the high tissue concentrations of TTX act as an effective
(cid:2)
The other characteristics of the Na channel are not chemical defense against predators. Also TTX resistance
)An(
l
aN
(a) Sodium
I
1 ms
(cid:3)40 40 80
Potassium
I
(b) l (μA)
1 K(cid:2)
V m (mV) Na(cid:2) (cid:3)80 (cid:3)40
40 80
(cid:3)1 Na(cid:2)
(cid:3)2
(cid:3)3
FIGURE 4.13 Ionic selectivity of the Na(cid:2)channel.
(a)The macroscopic Na(cid:2)current is recorded with the double-electrode
voltage clamp technique in a mammalian skeletal muscle fibre at dif-
ferent test membrane potentials (from (cid:3)70 to (cid:2)80mV) from a holding
FIGURE 4.12 Activation–inactivation properties of the macro- potential of (cid:3)80mV. (a) Inward currents in normal Na(cid:2)–Ringer
scopic voltage-gated Na(cid:2)current. (sodium) and in a solution where all Na(cid:2)ions are replaced by K(cid:2)ions
The I Na(cid:3)Vrelation has a bell shape with a peak at (cid:3)40mV and a rever- (potassium). The other voltage-gated currents are blocked. (b) I(cid:3)V
sal potential at (cid:2)30mV (the average E Nain the rabbit node is (cid:2)27mV). relation of the currents recorded in (a). Iis the amplitude of the peak
(b) Activation (right curve) and inactivation (left curve) curves current at each tested potential. Adapted from Pappone PA(1980)
obtained from nine different experiments. The voltage protocols used Voltage clamp experiments in normal and denervated mammalian
are shown in insets. In the ordinates, I/I maxrepresents the ratio of the skeletal muscle fibers. J Physiol. 306, 377–410, with permission.
peak Na(cid:2)current (I) recorded at the tested potential of the abscissae
and the maximal peak Na(cid:2)current (I ) recorded in this experiment.
max
It corresponds in the activation curve to the peak current recorded at
(cid:3)40mV in Figure 4.11. From Chiu SY, Ritchie JM, Bogart RB, Stagg D
(1979) Aquantitative description of membrane currents from a rabbit
myelinated nerve. J. Physiol.292, 149–166, with permission.

58 4. THE VOLTAGE-GATED CHANNELS OF Na(cid:2)ACTION POTENTIALS
(a)
100
(b)
)%(
tnerruc
(cid:2)aN
drawni
kaeP
E387Q
V-clamp
80
60
V
c
40
20 Wild-type
0 Oocyte
10(cid:3)11 10(cid:3)9 10(cid:3)7 10(cid:3)5
[Tetrodotoxin] (M)
I II III IV
1 2 3 4 5 6
N
C
tetrodotoxin, saxitoxin, μ-conotoxins β-scorpion toxins
veratridine, batrachotoxin, aconitine, grayanotoxin brevetoxins, ciguatoxins
α-scorpion toxin, β-pompilidotoxin local anesthetics and their congeners
sea anemone toxin
FIGURE 4.14 Asingle mutation close to the S6 segment of repeat I completely suppresses the sensitivity
of the Na(cid:2)channel to TTX.
(a)Amutation of the glutamic acid residue 387 to glutamine (E387Q) is introduced in the rat Na(cid:2)channel type
II. Xenopusoocytes are injected with either the wild-type mRNAor the mutant mRNA. The macroscopic Na(cid:2)
currents are recorded 4–7 days later with the double-electrode voltage clamp technique. Dose-response curves
for the wild-type (open circles) and the mutant E387Q (filled circles) to tetrodotoxin (TTX). TTX sensitivity is
determined by perfusing TTX-containing external solutions and by measuring the macroscopic peak inward
current. The TTX concentration that reduces the wild-type Na(cid:2)current by 50% (IC ) is 18nM. Data are averaged
50
from 7–8 experiments. (b)Topology of drug binding sites on Na(cid:2)channel α-subunit. Each symbol representsthe
toxin or drug binding site indicated at the bottom of the figure. All these sites have been characterized by site-
directed mutagenesis. Part (a) from Noda M, Suzuki H, Numa S, Stühmer W (1989) Asingle point mutation
confers tetrodotoxin and saxitoxin insensitivity on the sodium channel II. FEBS Lett. 259, 213–216, with
permission. Part (b) drawing adapted from Ogata N and Ohishi Y(2002) Molecular diversity of structure and
function of the voltage-gated Na(cid:2)channels. Jpn. J. Pharmacol.88, 365–377.
enables pufferfishes to feed on TTX-bearing organisms (1) hydrophilic toxins such as TTX, saxitoxin (STX) and
that are avoided by other fishes. α-conus toxin; (2) lipid-soluble neurotoxins such as
(cid:2)
TTX is not the only toxin to target Na channels. batrachotoxin (BTX), veratridine, aconitine and
Most of these toxins, except for TTX and its congeners grayanotoxin; (3) α-scorpion peptide toxins and sea
that occlude the outer pore of the channel, bind to anemone peptide toxins; (4) β-scorpion peptide toxins;
sites that are related to activation and inactiva- (5) lipid-soluble brevetoxins and ciguatoxins. They can
tion processes. They fall into at least five different have opposite effects. For example, toxins (2) are acti-
(cid:2)
classes according to their corresponding receptor sites: vators of Na channels.

4.2 THE DEPOLARIZATION PHASE OF Na(cid:2)-DEPENDENT ACTION POTENTIALS RESULTS FROM THE TRANSIENT ENTRY OF Na(cid:2)IONS 59
4.2.7 Segment S4, the region between segments acid sequence of S4 is conserved among the different
S5 and S6, and the region between voltage-gated channels. These observations led to the
domains III and IV play a significant suggestion that S4 segments have a transmembrane
role in activation, ion permeation and orientation and are voltage sensors. To test this pro-
inactivation, respectively posed role, positively charged amino acid residues are
replaced by neutral or negatively charged residues in
The major questions about a voltage-gated ionic chan- (cid:2)
the S4 segment of a rat brain Na channel type II. The
(cid:2)
nel and particularly the Na channel are the following:
mutated channels are expressed in Xenopus oocytes.
• How does the channel open in response to a voltage When more than three positive residues are mutated in
change? the S4 segments of repeat I or II, no appreciable expres-
• How is the permeation pathway designed to define sion of the mutated channel is obtained. The replace-
single-channel conductance and ion selectivity? ment of only one arginine or lysine residue in segment
• How does the channel inactivate? S4 of repeat I by a glutamine residue shifts the activation
curve to more positive potentials (Figure 4.15b, c).
(cid:2)
In order to identify regions of the Na channels
It is hypothesized that the positive charges in S4
involved in these functions, site-directed mutagenesis
form ion pairs with negative charges in other trans-
experiments were performed. The activity of each type
membrane regions, thereby stabilizing the channel
(cid:2)
of mutated Na channel is analyzed with patch clamp
in the non-conducting closed conformation. With a
recording techniques.
change in the electric field across the membrane, these
ion pairs would break as the S4 charges move and new
The short segments between putative membrane
ion pairs would form to stabilize the conducting, open
spanning segments S5 and S6 are membrane
conformation of the channel.
associated and contribute to pore formation
(cid:2) (cid:2)
The Na channels are highly selective for Na ions. The cytoplasmic loop between domains III and
This selectivity presumably results from negatively IV contains the inactivation particle which, in a
charged amino acid residues located in the channel voltage-dependent manner, enters the mouth of the
(cid:2)
pore. Moreover, these amino acids must be specific to Na channel pore and inactivates the channel
(cid:2)
Na channels (i.e. different from the other members of
voltage-gated cationic channels such as
K(cid:2)
and
Ca2(cid:2) The results obtained from three different types of
(cid:2) experiments strongly suggest that the short cytoplasmic
channels) to explain their weak permeability to K or
Ca2(cid:2)
ions.
loop connecting homologous domains III and IV, L
III–IV
loop (see Figures 4.6aand 4.16a), is involved in inacti-
Studies using mutagenesis to alter ion channel func-
vation: (i) cytoplasmic application of endopeptidases;
tion have shown that the region connecting the S5 and
(ii) cytoplasmic injection of antibodies directed against a
S6 segments forms part of the channel lining (see
peptide sequence in the region between repeatsIII and IV;
Figure 4.6). Asingle amino acid substitution in these
and (iii) cleavage of the region between repeats III and
regions in repeats III and IV alters the ion selectivity of
the
Na(cid:2)
channel to resemble that of
Ca2(cid:2)
channels.
IV (Figure 4.16a–c); all strongly reduce or block inacti-
vation. Moreover, in some human pathology where the
These residues would constitute part of the selectivity
(cid:2)
Na channels poorly inactivate (as shown with single-
filter of the channel. There is now a general agreement
channel recordings from biopsies),this region is mutated.
that the selectivity filter is formed by pore loops; i.e.
Positively charged amino acid residues of this
relatively short polypeptide segments that extend into
L loop are not required for inactivation since only
the aqueous pore from the extracellular side of the III–IV
the mutation of a hydrophobic sequence, isoleucine-
membrane. Rather than extending completely across
phenylalanine-methionine (IFM), to glutamine com-
the lipid bilayer, a large portion of the pore loop is near
pletely blocks inactivation. The critical residue of the
the extracellular face of the channel. Only a short
IFM motif is phenylalanine since its mutation to glutam-
region extends into the membrane to form the selectiv-
(cid:2) ine slows inactivation 5000-fold. It is proposed that
ity filter. In the case of the voltage-gated Na channel,
this IFM sequence is directly involved in the confor-
each of the four homologous domains contributes a
mational change leading to inactivation. It would enter
loop to the ion conducting pore.
the mouth of the pore, thus occluding it during the
process of inactivation. In order to test this hypothesis,
The S4 segment is the voltage sensor
the ability of synthetic peptides containing the IFM
The S4 segments are positively charged and hydro- motif to restore fast inactivation to non-inactivating rat
(cid:2)
phobic (Figure 4.15a). Moreover, the typical amino brain Na channels expressed in kidney carcinoma

60 4. THE VOLTAGE-GATED CHANNELS OF Na(cid:2)ACTION POTENTIALS
(a) 217 220 223 226 229 232
-Ala Leu Arg Thr Phe Arg ValLeu Arg AlaLeu Lys ThrlleSerVallleProGlyLeu -
I S4
850 853 856 859 862
-ValLeu Arg SerPhe Arg Leu Leu Arg ValPhe LLyyss LeuAla Lys SerTroProThrLeu -
II S4
(b) Wild type (c) Wild type
l
Na 10
500 pA 05
K226Q
0
(cid:3)100 (cid:3)50 0 50 100
V (mV)
l
Na
cells is examined. The intrinsic inactivation of Na(cid:2) ensure a sudden and brief depolarization of the mem-
channels is first made non-functional by a mutation of brane above 0mV.
the IFM motif. When the recording is now performed (cid:2)
Rapid activation of Na channels makes the
with a patch pipette containing the synthetic peptide
depolarization phase sudden
with an IFM motif, the non-inactivating whole cell
(cid:2)
Na current now inactivates. Since the restored inacti- In response to a depolarization to the threshold
(cid:2)
vation has the rapid, voltage-dependent time course potential, the closed Na channels (Figure 4.17a) of the
(cid:2) (cid:2)
characteristic of inactivation of the wild-type Na axon initial segment begin to open (b). The flux of Na
(cid:2)
channels, it is proposed that the IFM motif serves as an ions through the few open Na channels depolarizes
inactivation particle (Figure 4.16d). the membrane more and thus triggers the opening of
(cid:2) (cid:2)
other Na channels (c). In consequence, the flux of Na
ions increases, depolarizes the membrane more and
4.2.8 Conclusion: the consequence of the
(cid:2) (cid:2)
(cid:2) opens other Na channels until all the NNa channels
opening of a population of NNa channels
(cid:2) of the segment of membrane are opened (d). In (d) the
is a transient entry of Na ions which
(cid:2)
depolarization phase is at its peak. Na channels are
depolarizes the membrane above 0mV
opened by depolarization and once opened, they con-
(cid:2)
The function of the population of NNa channels at tribute to the membrane depolarization and therefore
the axon initial segment or at nodes of Ranvier is to to their activation: it is a self-maintained process.
l/l
xam
2 ms
(cid:3)20 mV
K226Q
(cid:3)20 mV
300 pA
2 ms
FIGURE 4.15 Effect of mutations in the S4 segment on Na(cid:2)current activation.
Oocytes are injected with the wild-type rat brain Na(cid:2)channel or with Na(cid:2)channels mutated on the S4 segment.
The activity of a population of Na(cid:2)channels is recorded in patch clamp (cell-attached macropatches). (a)Amino
acid sequences of segment S4 of the internal repeats I (I S4) and II (II S4) of the wild-type rat Na(cid:2)channel. Positively
charged amino acids are boxed with solid lines and the numbers of the relevant residues are given. In the mutated
channel studied here the lysine residue in position 226 is replaced by a glutamine residue (K226Q). (b)In response
to step depolarizations ranging from (cid:3)60 to (cid:2)70mV from a holding potential of (cid:3)120mV, a family of macro-
scopic Na(cid:2)currents is recorded for each type of Na(cid:2)channel. The arrow indicates the response to the test poten-
tial (cid:3)20mV. Note that at (cid:3)20mV the amplitude of the Na(cid:2)current is at its maximum for the wild-type and less
than half maximum for the mutated channel. (c)Steady-state activation (right) and inactivation (left) curves for
the wild-type (circles) and the mutant (diamonds) Na(cid:2)channels. Adapted from Stühmer W, Conti F, Suzuki H et al.
(1989) Structural parts involved in activation and inactivation of the sodium channel. Nature339, 597–603, with
permission.

4.2 THE DEPOLARIZATION PHASE OF Na(cid:2)-DEPENDENT ACTION POTENTIALS RESULTS FROM THE TRANSIENT ENTRY OF Na(cid:2)IONS 61
(a) 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000
I II III IV
1–1503 1504–2005
cZ-1
(b) (c)
I Na I Na mutated
1
2
3
4 50 pA
5 2 ms
6
wild type
7
8
200 pA
2 ms
5 pA
50 ms
(d) I IV I IV
II III II III
F
M I
I
(cid:2)H N F (cid:2)H N
3 M 3
CO(cid:3) CO(cid:3)
2 2
FIGURE 4.16 Effects of mutations in the region between repeats III and IV on Na(cid:2)current inactivation.
(a)Linear representation of the wild-type Na(cid:2)channel (upper trace) and the mutated Na(cid:2)channel (bottom
trace). The mutation consists of a cut with an addition of four to eight residues at each end of the cut. An
equimolar mixture of the two mRNAs encoding the adjacent fragments of the Na(cid:2)channel protein separated
with a cut is injected in oocytes. (b)Single-channel recordings of the activity of the mutated Na(cid:2)channel in
response to a depolarizing step to (cid:3)20mV from a holding potential of (cid:3)100mV. Note that late single or double
openings (line 8) are often recorded. The mean open time τ is 5.8ms and the elementary conductance γ is
o Na
17.3pS. (c)Macroscopic Na(cid:2)currents recorded from the mutated (upper trace) and the wild-type (bottom
trace) Na(cid:2)channels. (d)Model for inactivation of the voltage-gated Na(cid:2)channels. The region linking repeats
III and IV is depicted as a hinged lid that occludes the transmembrane pore of the Na(cid:2)channel during inacti-
vation. Parts (a)–(c) from Pappone PA(1980) Voltage clamp experiments in normal and denervated mam-
malian skeletal muscle fibers. J Physiol.306, 377–410, with permission. Drawing (d) from West JW, Patton DE,
Scheuer T et al.(1992) Acluster of hydrophobic amino acid residues required for fast sodium channel inacti-
vation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA89, 10910–10914, with permission.

62 4. THE VOLTAGE-GATED CHANNELS OF Na(cid:2)ACTION POTENTIALS
(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)(cid:2) (cid:2)(cid:2) (cid:2)
(a) V (cid:3)80/(cid:3)60 mV
rest
(cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3)(cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3)(cid:3) (cid:3)(cid:3) (cid:3)
C C C
(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
(b) V (cid:3)60/(cid:3)40 mV
threshold
(cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3)(cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3)
C O C
Na(cid:2)
(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
(c) V (cid:3)20 mV
depol
(cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3)
O O C
Na(cid:2) Na(cid:2)
(cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3)
(d)V (cid:2)10 mV
peak
(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
O O O
Na(cid:2) Na(cid:2) Na(cid:2)
(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
(e) V (cid:3)20 mV
repolarization
(cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3)
O
I I Na(cid:2)
FIGURE 4.17 Different states of voltage-gated Na(cid:2)channels in relation to the different phases of the
Na(cid:2)-dependent action potential.
C, closed state; O, open state; I, inactivated state; :, driving force for Na(cid:2)ions.
Rapid inactivation of Na(cid:2) channels makes the spike repolarization, though in mammalian peripheral
depolarization phase brief nerves this current is almost absent. However, the action
potentials of the squid axon and that of mammalian
(cid:2)
Once the Na channels have opened, they begin nerves have the same duration. This is because the
to inactivate (e). Therefore, though the membrane is Na(cid:2) current in mammalian axons inactivates two to
(cid:2)
depolarized, the influx of Na ions diminishes quickly. three times faster than that of the frog axon. Moreover,
Therefore the Na(cid:2) -dependent action potential is a spike the leak K(cid:2) currents are important in mammalian axons
and does not present a plateau phase. Inactivation is a (see below).
very important protective mechanism since it prevents Voltage-gated K(cid:2) channels can be classified into two
potentially toxic persistent depolarization. major groups based on physiological properties:
• Delayed rectifiers which activate after a delay follow-
4.3 THE REPOLARIZATION PHASE OF ing membrane depolarization and inactivate slowly
THE SODIUM-DEPENDENT ACTION • A-type channels which are fast activating and fast
POTENTIAL RESULTS FROM Na(cid:2) inactivating.
CHANNEL INACTIVATION AND
(cid:2)
(cid:2) The first type, the delayed rectifier K channels, plays
PARTLY FROM K CHANNEL
a role in action potential repolarization. The A-types
ACTIVATION
inactivate too quickly to do so. They play a role in fir-
ing patterns and are explained in Chapter 14.
(cid:2)
The participation of a voltage-gated K current in This section will explain the structure and activity of
action potential repolarization differs from one prepar- the voltage-gated, delayed rectifier K(cid:2) channels respon-
ation to another. For example, in the squid axon the sible for action potential repolarization in the squid or
(cid:2)
voltage-gated K current plays an important role in frog nerves. Then Section 4.4 will explain the other mode

4.3 THE REPOLARIZATION PHASE OF THE SODIUM-DEPENDENT ACTION POTENTIAL RESULTS FROM Na(cid:2)CHANNEL INACTIVATION 63
of repolarization observed in mammalian nerves, in (a)
which the delayed rectifier current does not play a
significant role.
4.3.1 The delayed rectifier
K(cid:2)
channel
loP op-
S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 S6
consists of four α-subunits and auxiliary
β-subunits
K(cid:2)
channels represent an extremely diverse ion chan-
T1 Domain
(cid:2)
nel type. All known K channels are related members
of a single protein family. Finding genes responsible
(cid:2) (cid:2) NH 3 PRC
for a native K current is not an easy task, because K
(cid:2)
channels have a great diversity: more than 100 of K
channelsubunits have been identified to date. Among
COOH
strategies used to identify which genes encode a par-
(cid:2)
ticular K channel are the single cell reverse transcrip-
tase chain reaction (scRT-PCR) protocol combined with (b)
patch clamp recording and the injection of subfamily- α-subunit
specific dominant negative constructs in recorded Extracellular
neurons. Results of such experiments strongly suggested
that α-subunits of delayed rectifiers are attributable to
Kv2 and Kv3 subfamily genes.
Intracellular
Delayed rectifier K(cid:2) channels α-subunits form homo-
β-subunit
or hetero-tetramers in the cell membrane. As for the
Na(cid:2) channel, the P loop linking segments S5 and S6 FIGURE 4.18 Putative transmembrane organization of the
contributes to the formation of the pore and the auxil- α-subunit of the delayed rectifier, voltage-gated K(cid:2)channel and
iary small β-subunits associated with the α-subunit are its associated cytoplasmic β-subunit.
(a) Diagrammatic representation of the predicted membrane topol-
considered to be intracellularly located (Figure 4.18). ogy of a single Kv2.1 α-subunit. S1–S6 represent the transmembrane
segments (cylinders represent putative α-helical segments), P-loop
4.3.2 Membrane depolarization favours the represents the amino acid residues that form the bulk of the lining of
conformational change of the delayed the channel pore, T1 domain represents the subfamily-specific
tetramerization domain in the cytoplasmic N-terminus, and PRC
rectifier channel towards the open state
represents the proximal restriction and clustering signal in the cyto-
The function of the delayed rectifier channel is to plasmic C-terminus. (b) Aschematic diagram showing the putative
structure of a voltage-dependent K(cid:2)channel. Achannel is composed
transduce, with a delay, membrane depolarization
(cid:2) of four pore-forming α-subunits, to each of which a β-subunit is
into an exit of K ions associated on the cytoplasmic side. The four α-subunits can be
homomers or heteromers. Part (a) from Misonou H, Mohapatra DP,
Single-channel recordings were obtained by Conti
Trimmer JS (2005) NeuroToxicology26, 743–752, with permission; Part
and Neher in 1980 from the squid axon. We shall, how- (b) from Song WJ (2002) Genes responsible for native depolarization-
ever, look at recordings obtained from K(cid:2) channels activated K(cid:2)currents in neurons. Neuroscience Research42, 7–14.
expressed in oocytes or in mammalian cell lines from
cDNAencoding a delayed rectifier channel of rat brain.
Since the macroscopic currents mediated by these current, upwardly directed, appears. It means that the
(cid:2)
channels have time courses and ionic selectivity resem- current is outward; K ions leave the cell. In fact, the
(cid:2)
bling those of the classical delayed outward currents driving force for K ions is outward at 0mV.
described in nerve and muscle, these single-channel It is immediately striking that the gating behaviour
recordings are good examples for describing the proper- of the delayed rectifier channel is different from that of
(cid:2)
ties of a delayedrectifier current. the Na channel (compare Figures 4.7aor 4.8aand 4.19).
Figure 4.19shows a current trace obtained from patch Here, the rectangular pulse of current lasts the whole
(cid:2)
clamp recordings (inside-out patch) of a rat brain K depolarizing step with short interruptions during
channel (RCK1) expressed in a Xenopus oocyte. In the which the current goes back to zero. It indicates that
presence of physiological extracellular and intracellular the delayed rectifier channel opens, closes briefly and
(cid:2)
K concentrations, a depolarizing voltage step to 0mV reopens many times during the depolarizing pulse: the
from a holding potential of (cid:3)60mV is applied. After delayed rectifier channel does not inactivate within
the onset of the step, a rectangular pulse of elementary seconds. Another difference is that the delay of opening

64 4. THE VOLTAGE-GATED CHANNELS OF Na(cid:2)ACTION POTENTIALS
(a) 0 mV
V
step
V (cid:3)60 Mv
H
(b) 0.8 pA
i
i k
k 0 pA
0.5 pA
250 ms
(c) i k Open
Closed
2 KCI
e
i
100 KCI Inside-out
FIGURE 4.19 Single K(cid:2)channel openings in response to a depolarizing step.
The activity of a single delayed rectifier channel expressed from rat brain cDNAin a Xenopus oocyte is
recorded in patch clamp (inside-out patch). Adepolarizing step to 0mV from a holding potential of (cid:3)60mV
(a)evokes the opening of the channel (b). The elementary current is outward. The channel then closes briefly
and reopens several times during the depolarization, as shown in the drawing (c)that interprets the current
trace. Bathing solution or intracellular solution (in mM): 100 KCl, 10 EGTA, 10 HEPES. Pipette solution or
extracellular solution (in mM): 115 NaCl, 2 KCl, 1.8 CaCl, 10 HEPES. Adapted from Stühmer W, Stocker M,
2
Sakmann B et al.(1988) Potassium channels expressed from rat brain cDNAhave delayed rectifier properties.
FEBS Lett. 242, 199–206, with permission.
of the delayed rectifier is much longer than that of the spends much more time in the open state than in the
(cid:2)
Na channel, even for large membrane depolarizations closed state: at 0mV its average open probability is high
(mean delay 4ms in Figure 4.20a). (p (cid:6)0.76).
o
When the same depolarizing pulse is now applied In order to test whether the delayed rectifier chan-
every 1–2s, we observe that the delay of channel open- nels show some inactivation, long-lasting recordings
ing is variable (1–10ms) but gating properties are the are performed. Though no significant inactivation is
same in all recordings: the channel opens, closes briefly apparent during test pulses in the range of seconds,
and reopens during the entire depolarizing step (Figure during long test depolarizations (in the range of min-
4.20a). Amplitude histograms collected at 0mV mem- utes) the channel shows steady-state inactivation at
brane potential from current recordings, such as those positive holding potentials (not shown). Therefore, in
shown in Figure 4.20a, give a mean amplitude of the the range of seconds, the inactivation of the delayed
unitary currents of (cid:2)0.8pA(Figure 4.20c). This means rectifier channel can be omitted: the channel fluctuates
that the most frequently occurring main amplitude is between the closed and open states:
(cid:2)0.8pA.
C (cid:2) O
4.3.3 The open probability of the delayed
The transition from the closed (C) state to the open (O)
rectifier channel is stable during a
state is triggered by membrane depolarization with a
depolarization in the range of
delay. The delayed rectifier channel activates in the
seconds
(cid:2)
range of milliseconds. In comparison, the Na channel
The average open time τ measured in the patch activates in the range of submilliseconds. The O to C
o
(cid:2)
illustrated in Figure 4.19is 4.6ms. The mean closed time transitions of the Na channel frequently happen
τ is 1.5ms. As seen in Figures 4.19and 4.20a, during a though the membrane is still depolarized. It also hap-
c
depolarizing pulse to 0mV the delayed rectifier channel pens when membrane repolarizes.

4.3 THE REPOLARIZATION PHASE OF THE SODIUM-DEPENDENT ACTION POTENTIAL RESULTS FROM Na(cid:2)CHANNEL INACTIVATION 65
(cid:3)60 mV
0.5 pA
20 ms
60
4.3.4 The K(cid:2) channel has a constant unitary to more depolarized potentials, which correspond to
conductance γ the physiological conditions, the K(cid:2) current is out-
K (cid:2)
ward. For more hyperpolarized potentials, the K cur-
In Figure 4.21a, unitary currents are shown in rent is inward.
response to increasing depolarizing steps from (cid:3)50 to The value of γ is given by the slope of the linear
(cid:2)20mV from a holding potential of (cid:3)80mV. We i /V curve. It hK as a constant value at any given
K
observe that both the amplitude of the unitary current membrane potential. This value varies between 10 and
and the time spent by the channel in the open state 15pS depending on the preparation (Figures 4.20d
increase with depolarization. and 4.21b).
(cid:2)
When the mean amplitude of the unitary K current
is plotted versus membrane test potential, a linear i /V (cid:2)
K 4.3.5 The macroscopic delayed rectifier K
relation is obtained (Figures 4.20dand 4.21b). This linear
current (I ) has a delayed voltage
i /Vrelation (between (cid:3)50 and (cid:2)20mV) is described K
K dependence of activation and inactivates
by the equation i (cid:6)γ (V(cid:3)E ), where Vis the mem-
K K K within tens of seconds
(cid:2)
brane potential, E is the reversal potential of the K
K
current, and γ is the conductance of the single delayed Whole cell currents in Xenopus oocytes expressing
K
(cid:2)
rectifier K channel, or unitary conductance. Linear delayed rectifier channels start to activate at potentials
back-extrapolation gives a reversal potential value positive to (cid:3)30mV and their amplitude is clearly voltage-
around (cid:3)90/(cid:3)80mV, a value close to E calculated dependent. When unitary currents recorded from 70
K
from the Nernst equation. This means that from (cid:3)80mV successive depolarizing steps to 0mV are averaged
snoitavresbO
1.0
40
20
0.5
0
0 0.4 0.8
(cid:3)100 (cid:3)50 0 50
)Ap(
tnerruC
(a) 0 mV
V
H O O
l C
k
(b) (d) I k Outward
I
k 1.5
(c)
γ
i (pA) K
Test potential (mV)
FIGURE 4.20 Characteristics of the elementary delayed rectifier current.
Same experimental design as in Figure 4.19. The patch of membrane contains a single delayed rectifier chan-
nel.(a)Successive sweeps of outward current responses to depolarizing steps from (cid:3)60mV to 0mV (C for
closed state, O for open state of the channel). (b)Averaged current from 70 elementary currents as in (a). (c)
Amplitude histogram of the elementary outward currents recorded at test potential 0mV. The mean elemen-
tary current amplitude observed most frequently is 0.8pA. (d)Single channel current–voltage relation (i (cid:3) V).
K
Each point represents the mean amplitude of at least 20 determinations. The slope is γ (cid:6)9.3pS. The reversal
K
potential E (cid:6)(cid:3)89mV. From Stühmer W, Stocker M, Sakmann B et al.(1988) Potassium channels expressed
rev
from rat brain cDNAhave delayed rectifier properties. FEBS Lett.242, 199–206, with permission.

66 4. THE VOLTAGE-GATED CHANNELS OF Na(cid:2)ACTION POTENTIALS
(a)
(cid:3)50
0 pA
i (outward) pA
k
(cid:3)30
(b)
0 pA
2
(cid:8)
K
(cid:3)100 V (mV) 100
(cid:3)10
(cid:3)2
0 pA
(cid:3)4
(cid:3)6
20
Outward
i
k
0 pA
5.5 K(cid:2)
1 pA
e
20 ms
e
i
Myoblast Cell attached
(cid:3)80 mV V (mV)
FIGURE 4.21 The single-channel current/voltage (i /V) relation is linear.
K
Delayed rectifier K(cid:2)channels from rat brain are expressed in a myoblast cell line. (a)The activity of a single
channel is recorded in patch clamp (cell-attached patch). Unitary currents are recorded at different test poten-
tials (from (cid:3)50mV to (cid:2)20mV) from a holding potential at (cid:3)80mV. Bottom trace is the voltage trace. (b)i (cid:3)V
K
relation obtained by plotting the mean amplitude of i at the different test potentials tested. i reverses at
K K
V(cid:6)(cid:3)75mV and γ (cid:6)14pS. Intrapipette solution (in mM): 145 NaCl, 5.5 KCl, 2 CaCl,2 MgCl, 10 HEPES.
K 2 2
Adapted from Koren G, Liman ER, Logothetis DE et al. (1990) Gating mechanism of a cloned potassium chan-
nel expressed in frog oocytes and mammalian cells. Neuron2, 39–51, with permission.
(Figure 4.20b), the macroscopic outward current which in this preparation is around (cid:3)40mV (Figure
obtained has a slow time to peak (4ms) and lasts the
4.22b). When the membrane is more hyperpolarized
entire depolarizing step. It closely resembles the whole
than the threshold potential, very few channels are
cell current recorded with two electrode voltage clamps
open and I is equal to zero. For membrane potentials
K
in the same preparation (rat brain delayed rectifier
more depolarized than the threshold potential, I
K
channels expressed in oocytes; see Figure 4.22a). depends on p and the driving force state (V(cid:3)E )
o K
The whole-cell current amplitude at steady state (once
which augments with depolarization. Once p is max-
o
it has reached its maximal amplitude) for a given
imal, I augments linearly with depolarization since it
K
potential is:
depends only on the driving force.
I (cid:6)Np i
K oK
The delayed rectifier channels are selective to
where N is the number of delayed rectifier channels K(cid:2) ions
in the membrane recorded, p the open probability at
o
steady state and i the elementary current. The num- Ion substitution experiments indicate that the rever-
K
(cid:2)
ber of open channels Np increases with depolarization sal potential of I depends on the external K ions con-
o K
(cid:2)
(to a maximal value) and so does I . centration as expected for a selective K channel. The
K
The I /Vrelation shows that the whole cell current reversal potential of the whole cell current is measured
K
varies linearly with voltage from a threshold potential as in Figure 4.22bin the presence of different external

4.4 SODIUM-DEPENDENT ACTION POTENTIALS ARE INITIATED AT THE AXON INITIAL SEGMENT 67
V The delayed rectifier channels are blocked by mil-
test
limolar concentrations of tetraethylammonium (TEA)
(cid:2)
and by Cs ions. Ammonium ions can pass through
(cid:3)80 most K(cid:2) channels, whereas its quaternary derivative
TEA cannot, resulting in the blockade of most of the
(cid:2)
voltage-gated K channels: TEAis a small open chan-
nel blocker. Amino acids in the carboxyl half of the
region linking segments S5 and S6 (i.e. adjacent to S6)
influence the sensitivity to pore blockers such as TEA.
50 ms
4.3.6 Conclusion: during an action potential
the consequence of the delayed opening
(cid:2) (cid:2)
of K channels is an exit of K ions,
which repolarizes the membrane to
resting potential
Owing to their delay of opening, delayed rectifier
channels open when the membrane is already depolar-
(cid:2) ized by the entry of Na ions through open voltage-
(cid:2)
gated Na channels (Figure 4.23). Therefore, the exit of
(cid:2)
K ions does not occur at the same time as the entry of
(cid:2) Na ions (see also Figure 4.24). This allows the mem-
brane to first depolarize in response to the entry of
(cid:2)
Na ions and then to repolarize as a consequence of
(cid:2)
the exit of K ions.
4.4 SODIUM-DEPENDENT ACTION
POTENTIALS ARE INITIATED AT
THE AXON INITIAL SEGMENT
IN RESPONSE TO A MEMBRANE
DEPOLARIZATION AND THEN
ACTIVELY PROPAGATE ALONG
THE AXON
(cid:2)
Na -dependent action potentials, because of their
(cid:2) short duration (1–5ms), are also named spikes. Na
spikes, for a given cell, have a stable amplitude and
duration; they all look alike, and are binary, all-or-
none. The pattern of discharge (which is often different
from the frequency of discharge) and not individual
spikes, carries significant information.
(cid:2)
4.4.1 Summary on the Na -dependent action
(cid:2)
concentrations of K ions. These experimental values
potential
(cid:2)
are plotted against the external K concentration,
(cid:2) (cid:2)
[K ] , on a semi-logarithmic scale. For concentrations The depolarization phase of Na spikes is due to the
o
(cid:2)
ranging from 2.5 (normal frog Ringer) to 100mM, a lin- rapid time to peak inward Na current which flows
ear relation with a slope of 55mV for a 10-fold change into the axon initial segment or node. This depolariza-
(cid:2) (cid:2)
in [K ] is obtained (not shown). These data are well tion is brief because the inward Na current inactivates
o
fitted by the Nernst equation. It indicates that the chan- in milliseconds (Figure 4.24b).
(cid:2) (cid:2)
nel has a higher selectivity for K ions over Na and In the squid giant axon or frog axon, spike repolar-
(cid:3) (cid:2)
Cl ions. ization is associated with an outward K current
Aμ
02
(a)
(cid:3)10
(cid:3)30
)Vm(
laitnetop
lasreveR
(b) 30
20
10
(cid:3)100 (cid:3)50 0 50 100
Test potential (mV)
(c)
(cid:3)50
(cid:3)70
(cid:3)90
(cid:3)110
2 5 10 50 100
mM [K(cid:2)]o
)A(cid:9)(
tnerruC
I
k
FIGURE 4.22 Characteristics of the macroscopic delayed rectifier
K(cid:2)current.
The activity of Ndelayed rectifier channels expressed from rat brain
cDNAin oocytes recorded in double-electrode voltage clamp. (a) In
response to depolarizing steps of increasing amplitude (given every 2s)
from a holding potential of (cid:3)80mV (upper traces), a non-inactivating
outward current of increasing amplitude is recorded (lower traces).
(b)The amplitude of the current at steady state is plotted against test
potential. The potential threshold for its activation is (cid:3)40mV. (c)The
value of the reversal potentials of the macroscopic current is plotted
against the extracellular concentration of K(cid:2)ions on a semi-logarithmic
scale. The slope is (cid:3)55mV. From Stühmer W, Stocker M, Sakmann B
et al.(1988) Potassium channels expressed from rat brain cDNAhave
delayed rectifier properties. FEBS Lett.242, 199–206, with permission.

68 4. THE VOLTAGE-GATED CHANNELS OF Na(cid:2)ACTION POTENTIALS
V
peak
V V
depol repol
V
threshold
V
rest
V
hyperpol
(cid:2) (cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2) (cid:2)(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)(cid:2) (cid:2)
V
(cid:3)80/(cid:3)60mV
rest
(cid:3) (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3)(cid:3) (cid:3)(cid:3) (cid:3)
C C C
(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
V
threshold
(cid:3)60/(cid:3)40mV
(cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3)
C C C
K(cid:2)
(cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3)
V peak (cid:2)10 mV
(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
C O C
K(cid:2) K(cid:2) K(cid:2)
(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
V (cid:3)20 mV
repol
(cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3)
O O O
K(cid:2)
(cid:2)(cid:2) (cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2) (cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)(cid:2)
V hyperpol (cid:3)90/(cid:3)70 mV
(cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)
C C O
FIGURE 4.23 States of the delayed rectifier K(cid:2) channels in relation to the different phases of the
Na(cid:2)-dependent action potential.
C, closed state; O, open state; q, driving force for K(cid:2)ions.
through delayed rectifier channels (Figures 4.24 and clamp studies confirm this observation. When the leak
4.25) since TEAapplication dramatically prolongs the current is subtracted, almost no outward current is
action potential (see Figure 4.4b). As pointed out by recorded in rabbit node (Figure 4.25b).
Hodgkin and Huxley: ‘The rapid rise is due almost However, squid and rabbit nerve action potentials
(cid:2) (cid:2)
entirely to Na conductance, but after the peak, the K have the same duration (Figure 4.25a). In this prepar-
conductance takes a progressively larger share until, ation, the normal resting membrane potential is around
by the beginning of the hyperpolarized phase, the Na(cid:2) (cid:3)80mV, which suggests the presence of a large leak K(cid:2)
conductance has become negligible. The tail of raised current. Moreover, test depolarizations evoke large out-
(cid:2)
conductance that falls away gradually during the ward K currents insensitive to TEA(Figure 4.26). How
(cid:2)
positive phase is due solely to K conductance, the does the action potential repolarize in such prepar-
(cid:2)
small constant leak conductance being of course present ations? First the Na currents in the rabbit node inacti-
throughout.’ vate two to three times faster than those in the frog node.
(cid:2)
In contrast, in rat or rabbit myelinated axons the Second, the large leak K current present at depolarized
action potential is very little affected by the application membrane potentials repolarizes the membrane. The
(cid:2)
of TEA. The repolarization phase in these preparations amplitude of the leak K current augments linearly with
(cid:2) (cid:2)
is largely associated with a leak K current. Voltage depolarization, depending only on the K driving force.

4.4 SODIUM-DEPENDENT ACTION POTENTIALS ARE INITIATED AT THE AXON INITIAL SEGMENT 69
(a) mVm.mho/cm2
90
35 (cid:3)Action potential
80
30
70
60 25
50 20
40 15 g
Na
30
10
20
10 5 g k
0 0
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4
ms
(b) V (mV)
0
(cid:3)30
(cid:3)50
(cid:3)70
1 2 3
Time (ms)
Na(cid:2) channels C O I C
Voltage-gated
K(cid:2) channels C O C
FIGURE 4.24 Gating of Na(cid:2)and K(cid:2)channels during the Na(cid:2)-dependent action potential.
(a)Interpretationof the manner in which the conductances to Na(cid:2)and K(cid:2)contribute to the action potential.
(b)State of the Na(cid:2)and K(cid:2)voltage-gated channels during the course of the action potential. O, channels open;
I, channels inactivate; C, channels close or are closed. Trace (a) adapted from Hodgkin ALand Huxley AF
(1952) Aquantitative description of membrane current and its application to conduction and excitation in
nerve. J. Physiol.117, 500–544, with permission.
4.4.2 Depolarization of the membrane to the (cid:2)
(cid:2) 4.4.3 The site of initiation of Na -dependent
threshold for voltage-gated Na channel
action potentials is the axon initial
activation has two origins
segment
The inward current which depolarizes the mem-
The site of initiation was suggested long ago to occur
brane of the initial segment to the threshold potential
(cid:2) in the axon initial segment since the threshold for spike
for voltage-gated Na channel opening is one of the
initiation was the lowest at this level. However, this has
following:
only recently been directly demonstrated with the
• Adepolarizing current resulting from the activity of double-patch clamp technique. First the dendrites and
excitatory afferent synapses (see Chapters 8 and 10) soma belonging to the same Purkinje neuron of the cere-
or afferent sensory stimuli. In the first case, the bellum are visualized in a rat brain slice. Then the activ-
synaptic currents generated at postsynaptic sites in ity is recorded simultaneously at both these sites with
response to synaptic activity summate, and when the two patch electrodes (whole-cell patches). To verify that
resulting current is inward it can depolarize the mem- somatic and dendritic recordings are made from the
brane to the threshold for spike initiation. In the sec- same cell, the Purkinje cell is filled with two differently
ond case, sensory stimuli are transduced in inward coloured fluorescent dyes: Cascade blue at the soma and
currents that can depolarize the membrane to the Lucifer yellow at the dendrite. To determine the site of
threshold for spike initiation. action potential initiation during synaptic activation of
• An intrinsic regenerative depolarizing current Purkinje cells, action potentials are evoked by stimula-
such as, for example, in heart cells or invertebrate tion of afferent parallel fibres which make synapses on
neurons. distal dendrites of Purkinje cells (see Figures 6.8and 6.9).

70 4. THE VOLTAGE-GATED CHANNELS OF Na(cid:2)ACTION POTENTIALS
(a)
20
0
(cid:3)20
(cid:3)40
(cid:3)60
(cid:3)80
0.2
(b)
(cid:2)
results suggest that the actual site of Na -dependent
In all Purkinje cells tested, the evoked action poten- action potential initiation is in the axon initial segment
tial recorded from the soma has a shorter delay and a of Purkinje cells. Experiments carried out by Sakmann
greater amplitude than that recorded from a dendrite et al. in other brain regions give the same conclusion
(Figure 4.27a). Moreover, the delay and the difference for all the neurons tested. This may be due to a higher
in amplitude between the somatic spike and the den- density of sodium channels in the membrane of the
dritic spike both augment when the distance between axon initial segment.
the two patch electrodes is increased. This suggests The action potential, once initiated, spreads pas-
that the site of initiation is proximal to the soma. sively back into the dendritic tree of Purkinje cells
Simultaneous whole-cell recordings from the soma (passively means that it propagates with attenuation
and the axon initial segment were performed to estab- since it is not reinitiated in dendrites). Simultaneously
lish whether action potential initiation is somatic or it actively propagates into the axon (not shown here;
axonal in origin. Action potentials clearly occurs first see below). In some neurons, for example the pyrami-
in the axon initial segment (Figure 4.27b). These dal cells of the neocortex, the action potential actively
)An(
0
0 5 0
5 5
0 0
Rabbit
(normal)
0 5 10 0 5 10
Time (ms)
Leak-subtracted current traces
An An
5
Time (ms)
I delayed rectifier
k
(cid:3)5 (cid:3)(cid:3) 15
0 (cid:3)10 (cid:3)15 Frog (normal)
(cid:3)15 I Na I Na
I
mits
Rabbit Frog
)Vm(
laitnetop
noitcA
(a) Control
60
20
(cid:3)20
(cid:3)60
(b) TTX
mV
60
20
(cid:3)20
(cid:3)60
(c) TTX (cid:2) TEA
60
20
(cid:3)20
(cid:3)60
50 mA/cm2
5 ms
FIGURE 4.25 The currents underlying the action potentials of FIGURE 4.26 TEA-resistant outward current in a mammalian
the rabbit and frog nerves. nerve.
(a)The action potentials are recorded intracellularly at 14°C. Bottom The currents evoked by depolarizing steps from (cid:3)60 to (cid:2)60mV from
trace is the current of stimulation injected in order to depolarize the a holding potential of (cid:3)80mV are recorded in voltage clamp in a node
membrane to initiate an action potential. (b) The currents flowing of Ranvier of an isolated rat nerve fibre. Control inward and outward
through the membrane at different voltages recorded in voltage currents (a), after TTX 25nM (b), and after TTX 25nM and TEA5mM
clamp. In the rabbit node, very little outward current is recorded after (c) are added to the extracellular solution. The outward current
the large inward Na(cid:2)current. In the frog nerve, a large outward K(cid:2) recorded in (c) is the leak K(cid:2)current. The delayed outward K(cid:2)current
current is recorded after the large inward Na(cid:2)current. Leak current is taken as the difference between the steady-state outward current in
is subtracted from each trace and does not appear in these recordings. (b) and the leak current in (c). Adapted from Brismar T (1980) Potential
Adapted from Chiu SY, Ritchie JM, Bogart RB, Stagg D (1979) Aquan- clamp analysis of membrane currents in rat myelinated nerve fibres.
titative description of membrane currents in rabbit myelinated nerve. J. Physiol.298, 171–184, with permission.
J. Physiol.292, 149–166, with permission.

4.4 SODIUM-DEPENDENT ACTION POTENTIALS ARE INITIATED AT THE AXON INITIAL SEGMENT 71
(a) first node. The entry of Na(cid:2) ions at this level will
Soma
depolarize the membrane of the second node and open
20 mV the closed Na(cid:2) channels. The action potential is now at
1 ms the level of the second node.
Dendrite
The propagation is unidirectional owing to
(cid:2)
Na channel inactivation
When the axon potential is, for example, at the level
(b) of the second node, the voltage-gated Na(cid:2) channels
Soma
of the first node are in the inactivated state since
they have just been activated or are still in the open
(cid:2)
Axon state (Figure 4.28). These Na channels cannot be
20 mV
reactivated. The current lines flowing from the second
0.5 ms
node will therefore activate only the voltage-gated
(cid:2)
Na channels of the third node towards axon termin-
(cid:2)
als, where the voltage-gated Na channels are in the
FIGURE 4.27 The Na(cid:2)-dependent action potential is initiated closed state (Figure 4.28). In the axon, under physio-
in the axon initial segment in Purkinje cells of the cerebellum.
logical conditions, the action potential cannot back-
The activity of a Purkinje cell recorded simultaneously at the level of
the soma and (a)117μm away from the soma at the level of a dendrite, propagate.
or (b)7μm away from the soma at the level of the axon initial segment,
with the double-patch clamp technique (whole-cell patches). Afferent
The refractory periods between two action
parallel fibres are stimulated by applying brief voltage pulses to an
potentials
extracellular patch pipette. In response to the synaptic excitation, an
action potential is evoked in the Purkinje cell and recorded at the two
After one action potential has been initiated, there is
different neuronal sites: soma and dendrite (a) or soma and axon (b).
Adapted from Stuart G and Hauser M (1994) Initiation and spread of a period of time during which a second action poten-
sodium action potentials in cerebellar Purkinje cells. Neuron 13, tial cannot be initiated or is initiated but has a smaller
703–712, with permission. amplitude (Figure 4.29): this period is called the
‘refractory period’ of the membrane. It results from
(cid:2) (cid:2)
Na channel inactivation. Since the Na channels do
not immediately recover from inactivation, they can-
backpropagates into the dendrites, but this is not a
not reopen immediately. This means that once the pre-
general rule.
ceding action potential has reached its maximum
(cid:2)
amplitude, Na channels will not reopen before a cer-
(cid:2)
4.4.4 The Na -dependent action potential tain period of time needed for their deinactivation
actively propagates along the axon to (Figure 4.24b). This represents the absolute refractory
axon terminals period which lasts in the order of milliseconds.
(cid:2)
Then, progressively, the Na channels will recover
(cid:2)
Voltage-gated Na channels are present all along
from inactivation and some will reopen in response to
the axon at a sufficient density to allow firing of axon
a second depolarization: this is the relative refractory
potentials. (cid:2)
period. This period finishes when all the Na channel
at the initial axonal segment or at a node are de-inacti-
vated. This actually protects the membrane from being
The propagation is active
depolarized all the time and enables the initiation of
Active means that the action potential is reinitiated at separate action potentials.
each node of Ranvier for a myelinated axon, or at each
(cid:2)
point for a non-myelinated axon. The flow of Na ions (cid:2) (cid:2)
4.4.5 Do the Na and K concentrations
(cid:2)
through the open Na voltage-gated channels of the
change in the extracellular or
axon initial segment creates a current that spreads pas-
intracellular media during
sively along the length of the axon to the first node of
firing?
Ranvier (Figure 4.28). It depolarizes the membrane of
(cid:2)
the first node to the threshold for action potential initi- Over a short timescale, the external or internal Na or
(cid:2)
ation. The action potential is now at the level of the K concentrations do not change during the emission

72 4. THE VOLTAGE-GATED CHANNELS OF Na(cid:2)ACTION POTENTIALS
Instantaneous view at t = 0
Closed Inactivated
(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
(cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3)
(cid:2)(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3)
(cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3)(cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
50
0
(cid:3)70
(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:3) (cid:3)(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
(cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:2)(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:3)
(cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:2)(cid:2) (cid:2)(cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3)
(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:3) (cid:3)(cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:2)
of action potentials. Asmall number of ions are in fact potentials, the K(cid:2) concentration can significantly
flowing through the channels during an action poten- increase in the external medium. This is due to the very
tial and the Na–K pump re-establishes continuously the small volume of the extracellular medium surrounding
(cid:2) (cid:2)
extracellular and intracellular Na and K concentra- neurons and the limited speed of the Na–K pump. This
tions at the expense of ATP hydrolysis. Over a longer excess of K(cid:2) ions is buffered by glial cells which are
timescale, during high-frequency trains of action highly permeable to K(cid:2) ions (see Section 2.1.3).
)Vm(
laitnetop
enarbmeM
50
0
(cid:3)70
)Vm(
laitnetop
enarbmeM
50
0
(cid:3)70
)Vm(
laitnetop
enarbmeM
Propagation
Open Closed
(cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:2)(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3)
Axon
(cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:2)(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3)
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
Distance along axon (mm)
Instantaneous view at t =1 ms Propagation
Closed Inactivated Open Closed
(cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:2)(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3)
Axon
(cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:2)(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3)
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
Distance along axon (mm)
Propagation
Instantaneous view at t = 2 ms
Closed Inactivated Open Closed
Axon
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
Distance along axon (mm)
FIGURE 4.28 Active propagation of the Na(cid:2)-dependent action potential in the axon and axon collaterals.
Scheme provided by Alberts B, Bray D, Lewis J et al.(1983) Molecular Biology of the Cell, New York: Garland
Publishing.

73
FURTHER READING
a f g Ca2(cid:2) channels. The resulting entry of Ca2(cid:2) ions into
axon terminals triggers exocytosis and neurotransmit-
100
ter release. The probability value of all these phenom-
ena is not 1. This means that the action potential can
50
fail to invade an axon terminal, the
Ca2(cid:2)
entry can fail
6 7 89101112 ms to trigger exocytosis, etc. Neurotransmitter release is
0
0 1 23 5 0 1 2 ms explained in Chapter 7.
Absolute Relative
FURTHER READING
Refractory periods
Anderson PAV and Greenberg RM (2001) Phylogeny of ion channels:
clues to structure and function. Comparative Biochemistry and
Physiology Part B129, 17–28.
Catterall WA(2000) From ionic currents to molecular mechanisms:
the structure and function of voltage-gated sodium channels.
Neuron26, 13–25.
Eaholtz G, Scheuer T, Catterall WA(1994) Restoration of inactivation
and block of open sodium channels by an inactivation gate pep-
tide. Neuron12, 1041–1048.
Goldin AL, Barchi RL, Caldwell JH et al. (2000) Nomenclature of
voltage-gated sodium channels. Neuron28, 365–368.
Hamill OP, Marty A, Neher E et al. (1981) Improved patch damp
technique for high resolution current recording from cells and cell-
free membrane patches. Pflügers Archiv.391, 85–100.
4.4.6 Characteristics of the Na(cid:2) -dependent Hodgkin AL and Huxley AF (1952) Aquantitative description of
membrane current and its application to conduction and excita-
action potential are explained by the
tion in nerve. J. Physiol. (Lond.)117, 500–544.
(cid:2)
properties of the voltage-gated Na Malin SA, Nerbonne JM (2002) delayed rectifier K(cid:2)currents, I , are
K
channel encoded by Kv2 α-subunits and regulate tonic firing in mam-
malian sympathetic neurons. J. Neuroscience22, 10094–10105.
(cid:2)
The threshold for Na -dependent action potential McCormick KA, Srinivasan J, White K, Scheuer T, Caterall WA(1999)
initiation results from the fact that voltage-gated Na(cid:2) The extracellular domain of the beta1 subunit is both necessary
and sufficient for beta1-like modulation of sodium channel gating.
channels open in response to a depolarization positive
to (cid:3)50/(cid:3)40mV. J. Biol. Chem.274, 32638–32646.
McKinnon R (2003) Potassium channels. FEBBS Letters555, 62–65.
(cid:2)
The Na -dependent action potential is all or none Neher E, Sakmann B (1976) Single channel currents recorded
(cid:2)
because voltage-gated Na channels self-activate (see from membrane of denervated frog muscle fibres. Nature 260,
Figure 4.17). It propagates without attenuationsince the 779–802.
(cid:2) Noda M, Ikeda T, Suzuki H et al. (1986) Expression of functional
density of voltage-gated Na channels is constant
sodium channels from cloned cDNA. Nature322, 826–828.
along the axon or at nodes of Ranvier. It propagates
Qu Y, Rogers JC, Chen SF, McCormick KA, Scheuer T, Catterall WA
unidirectionally because of the rapid inactivation of (1999) Functional roles of the extracellular segments of the sodium
(cid:2)
voltage-gated Na channels. The instantaneous fre- channel alpha subunit in voltage-dependent gating and modula-
quency of Na(cid:2) -dependent action potentials is limited tion by beta1 subunits. J. Biol. Chem.274, 32647–32654.
by the refractory periods, which also results from voltage- Sokolov S, Scheuer T, Catterall WA(2005) Ion permeation through a
(cid:2) voltage-sensitive gating pore in brain sodium channels having
gated Na channel inactivation.
voltage sensor mutations. Neuron47, 183–189.
Stuart G and Häuser M (1994) Initiation and spread of sodium action
potentials in cerebellar Purkinje cells. Neuron13, 703–712.
(cid:2)
4.4.7 The role of the Na -dependent action
Vassilev PM, Scheuer T, Catterall WA (1988) Identification of an
potential is to evoke neurotransmitter intracellular peptide segment involved in sodium channel inacti-
release vation. Science241, 1658–1661.
Venkatesh B, Lu SQ, Dandona N et al. (2005) Genetic basis of
The role of the Na(cid:2) -dependent action potential is to tetrodotoxin resistance in pufferfishes. Current Biology 15,
2069–2072.
propagate, without attenuation, a strong depolariza-
Wang SY and Wang GK (2003) Voltage-gated sodium channels as
tion to the membrane of the axon terminals. There, this
primary targets of diverse lipid soluble neurotoxins. Cellular
depolarization opens the high-threshold voltage-gated Signaling15, 151–159.
)Vm(
V
100
50
0
)Vm(
V
bcd e
FIGURE 4.29 The refractory periods.
Afirst action potential is recorded intracellularly in the squid axon in
vitroin response to a small depolarizing stimulus (a). Then a second
stimulus with an intensity six times greater than that of the first is
applied 4, 5, 6 or 9ms after. The evoked spike is either absent (b and
c; only the stimulation artifact is recorded) or has a smaller amplitude
(d to f). Finally, when the membrane is back in the resting state, the
evoked action potential has the control amplitude (g). Adapted from
Hodgkin AL and Huxley AF (1952) A quantitative description of
membrane current and its application to conduction and excitation in
nerve. J. Physiol.117, 500–544, with permission.

74 4. THE VOLTAGE-GATED CHANNELS OF Na(cid:2)ACTION POTENTIALS
APPENDIX 4.1 CURRENT CLAMP long as the current Iis very small in order not to cause
RECORDING a significant voltage drop across R (see the last section
p
of this appendix).
The current clamp technique, or intracellular record-
How to inject current through the
ing in current clamp mode, is the traditional method
intracellular electrode
for recording membrane potential: resting membrane
potential and membrane potential changes such as In a current injection circuit is connected to the input
action potentials and postsynaptic potentials. Membrane node, the current injected (I) flows down the electrode
potential changes result from intrinsic or extrinsic cur- into the cell (Figure A4.1). This current source allows a
rents. Intrinsic currents are synaptic or autorhythmic constant (DC) current to be injected, either outward to
currents. Extrinsic currents are currents of known ampli- depolarize the membrane or inward to hyperpolarize the
tude and duration applied by the experimenter through membrane (Figure A4.2). When the recording electrode is
the intracellular recording electrode, in order to mimic filled with KCl, a current that expells K(cid:2) ions into the cell
currents produced by synaptic inputs. interior depolarizes the membrane (V becomes less neg-
m
Current clamp means that the current appliedthrough ative) (Figure A4.2a), whereas a current that expels Cl(cid:3)
the intracellular electrode is clamped to a constant ions into the cell interior hyperpolarizes the membrane
value by the experimenter. It does not mean that the (V becomes more negative) (Figure A4.2b).
m
current flowing through the membrane is clamped to a
constant value.
Outward means that the current is flowing through
the membrane from the inside of the cell to the bath;
How to record membrane potential
inward is the opposite
The intracellular electrode (or the patch pipette) is
The current source can also be used to inject a short-
connected to a unity-gain amplifier that has an input
duration pulse of current: a depolarizing current pulse
resistance many orders of magnitude greater than that
above threshold to evoke action potential(s) or a low-
of the micropipette plus the input resistance of the cell
membrane (R (cid:2)R ). The output of the amplifier fol- amplitude depolarizing (Figure A4.3)or hyperpolarizing
p m
lows the voltage at the tip of the intracellular electrode
(V ) (Figure A4.1). By definition, membrane potential (a) (b)
V p is equal to V (cid:3)V (i for intracellular and e for l
m i e
extracellular). In Figure A4.1, V (cid:3)V (cid:6)V (cid:3)V (cid:6)
i e p bath
V (cid:3)V (cid:6)V (cid:3)0(cid:6)V . When a current Iis simul-
tap neousg lr you n pd assedp throughp the electrode, V p(cid:6)V
m
as l K(cid:2)K(cid:2) K(cid:2) l CC l(cid:3)l(cid:3) Cl(cid:3) l
V p(cid:2)V cmd (cid:2)1 V cmd
A
2(cid:2)1
R o l l
V
m
R ele ec co trr od din eg R p V p A 1 V p FIGURE A4.2 (a) When the recording electrode is filled with
KCl, a current expels K(cid:2)ions into the cell interior to depolarize the
membrane (V becomes less negative). (b)Acurrent expels Cl(cid:3)ions
V V m
e l into the cell interior to hyperpolarize the membrane (V becomes
m
more negative).
l l
R
m
FIGURE A4.1 Aunity gain amplifier A1 and a current source
made by adding a second amplifier A2.
The micropipette voltage V is measured by A1. The command voltage
V cmdand V pare the inputs
op
f A2 (V pand V cmdare added). The current I V m
20 mV ΔV
m
applied by the experimenter in order to induce V changes, flows
m
through R and is equal to I(cid:6)V /R since the voltage across the output ΔI 0.5 nA ΔI
o p o
resistor R o is equal to V cmd regardless of V p. I flows through the 50 ms ΔV m (cid:6) R mΔI
micropipette into the cell then out through the cell membrane into the
bath grounding electrode. Iis here an outward current. Capacitances FIGURE A4.3 Injection of a suprathreshold (left) and sub-
are ignored. Adapted from The Axon Guide, Axon Instruments Inc., 1993. threshold(right) depolarizing pulse.

75
APPENDIX 4.2 VOLTAGE CLAMP RECORDING
current pulse to measure the input membrane resistance value or command potential (V ). Two voltage
cmd
R since ΔV (cid:6)R (cid:7)ΔI. clamp techniques are commonly used. With the two-
m m m
electrode voltage clamp method, one electrode is used
How to measure the membrane potential when a for membrane potential measurement and the other
current is passed down the electrode for passing current (Figure A4.4). The other method
uses just one electrode, in one of the following ways:
The injected current (I) causes a corresponding volt-
• The same electrode is used part time for membrane
age drop (IR ) across the resistance of the pipette (R ). It
p p
potential measurement and part time for current
is therefore difficult to separate the potential at the tip
of the electrode (V (cid:6)V ) from the total potential injection (also called the discontinuous single-
p m
(V (cid:2)IR ). For example, if R (cid:6)50MΩ and I(cid:6)0.5nA, electrode voltage clamp technique, or dSEVC). This
p p p
IR (cid:6)25mV, a value in the V range. Aspecial compen- is used for cells that are too small to be impaled
p m
with two electrodes; it will not be explained here.
sation circuitry can be used to eliminate the micropipette
• In the patch clamp technique the same electrode
voltage drop IR .
p
is used full time for simultaneously measuring
membrane potential and passing current (see
Appendix 4.3).
APPENDIX 4.2 VOLTAGE CLAMP
RECORDING In the two-electrode voltage clamp technique, the
membrane potential is recorded by a unity gain ampli-
fier A1 connected to the voltage-recording electrode
The voltage clamp technique (or intracellular record-
E1. The membrane potential measured, V (or V ; see
ing in voltage clamp mode) is a method for recording m p
Appendix 4.1) is compared with the command potential
the current flowing through the cell membrane while
V in a high-gain differential amplifier A2. It sends a
the membrane potential is held (clamped) at a constant cmd
voltage output V proportional to the difference between
value by the experimenter. In contrast to the current o
V and V . V forces a current Ito flow through the
clamp technique (see Appendix 4.1), voltage clamp m cmd o
current-passing electrode E2 in order to obtain
does not mimic a process found in nature. However, V (cid:3)V (cid:6)0. The current I represents the total cur-
there are several reasons for performing voltage clamp m cmd
rent that flows through the membrane. It is the same at
experiments:
every point of the circuit.
• When studying voltage-gated channels, voltage
clamp allows control of a variable (voltage) that Example of a voltage-clamp recording experiment
determines the opening and closing of these
channels. Two electrodes are placed intracellularly into a neu-
• By holding the membrane potential constant, the ronal soma (an invertebrate neuron for example)
experimenter ensures that the current flowing (Figure A4.5). The membrane potential is first held at
through the membrane is linearly proportional to (cid:3)80mV. In this condition an outward current flows
the conductance G (G(cid:6)1/R) being studied. To
study, for example, the conductance G of the total
Na
number (N) of voltage-gated Na(cid:2) channels present (cid:2) V cmd
in the membrane, K(cid:2) and Ca2(cid:2) voltage-gated chan- V o A 2(cid:3) V p
nels are blocked by pharmacological agents, and
l
the current I flowing through the membrane,
Na
recorded in voltage clamp, is proportional to G :
Na
A 1 V p
I (cid:6)V G (cid:6)kG , since V is constant. R p1
Na m Na Na m
R
p2
Voltage recording
How to clamp the membrane potential at a known Current passing
electrode E
and constant value electrode E 2 1
The aim of the voltage clamp technique is to adjust R m l
continuously the membrane potential V to the com- Reference
m
electrode
mand potential V fixed by the experimenter. To do so, l
cmd
V mis continuously measured anda current Iis passed FIGURE A4.4 Two-electrode voltage clamp.
through the cell membrane to keep V m at the desired Adapted from The Axon Guide, Axon Instruments Inc., 1993.

76 4. THE VOLTAGE-GATED CHANNELS OF Na(cid:2)ACTION POTENTIALS
(cid:3)20 I but of opposite direction is continuously sent (in
Na
the microsecond range) in the circuit to compensate I
Na
and to clamp the membrane to V . Therefore, once
cmd
V H (cid:6) (cid:3)80 mV the membrane capacitance is charged, I ((cid:3)20)(cid:6)I L(cid:2)I Na.
l c Usually on recordings, I Cis absent owing to the possi-
l ((cid:3)80) l ((cid:3)80) bility of compensating for it with the voltage clamp
l 1 amplifier.
l Once the membrane capacitance is charged, the
c
l leak (cid:2) l Na total current flowing through the circuit is I(cid:6)I L(cid:2)I Na
(I (cid:6)0). Therefore, in all measures of I , the leak cur-
c Na
rent I must be deduced. To do so, small-amplitude
L
hyperpolarizing or depolarizing steps (ΔV (cid:6)(cid:10)5 to
m
(cid:3)20 (cid:10)20mV) are applied at the beginning and at the end of
the experiment. These voltage steps are too small to
open voltage-gated channels in order to have I (cid:6)0
Na
V H (cid:6) (cid:3)80 mV and I(cid:6)I L. If we suppose that I L is linearly propor-
l c tional to ΔV , then I for a ΔV of(cid:2)80mV (from (cid:3)80
m L m
l ((cid:3)80) l ((cid:3)80) to 0mV) is eight times the value of I Lfor ΔV m(cid:6)(cid:2)10mV
1a
(seeFigure 3.9d).
l
c
l Is all the membrane surface clamped?
l ((cid:3)80) leak l ((cid:3)80)
1b
In small and round cells such as pituitary cells, the
l ((cid:3)80) l ((cid:3)80) membrane potential is clamped on all the surface. In
1c
contrast, in neurons, because of their geometry, the
voltage clamp is not achieved on all the membrane
l
Na surface: the distal dendritic and axonal membranes are
out of control because of their distance from the soma
where the intracellular electrodes are usually placed.
FIGURE A4.5 Various currents. Such space clamp problems have to be taken into
(1(cid:6)1a(cid:2)1b(cid:2)1c) evoked by a voltage step to (cid:3)20mV (V H(cid:6)(cid:3)80mV) account by the experimenter in the analysis of the
in the presence of K(cid:2)and Ca2(cid:2)channel blockers. results. In the giant axon of the squid, this problem is
overcome by inserting two long axial intracellular elec-
trodes into a segment of axon in order to control the
through the membrane in order to maintain the mem- membrane potential all along this segment.
brane potential at a value more hyperpolarized than
V rest. This stable outward current I(cid:3)80 flows through
the membrane as long as V (cid:6)(cid:3)80mV.
cmd APPENDIX 4.3 PATCH CLAMP
Avoltage step to (cid:3)20mV is then applied for 100ms.
RECORDING
This depolarizing step opens voltage-gated channels.
In the presence of
K(cid:2)
and
Ca2(cid:2)
channel blockers, only
(cid:2)
a voltage-gated Na current is recorded. To clamp the The patch clamp technique is a variation of the volt-
membrane at the new V cmd(cid:6)(cid:3)20mV, a current I ((cid:3)20) age clamp technique. It allows the recording of current
is sent by the amplifier A2. On the rising phase of the flowing through the membrane: either the current
step this current is equal to the capacitive current I flowing through all the channels open in the whole cell
c
necessary to charge the membrane capacitance to its membrane or the current flowing through a single
new value plus the leak current I flowing through channel in a patch of membrane. In this technique,
L
leak channels (lines 1a and 1b). Since the depolarizing only one electrode is used full time for both voltage
(cid:2)
step opens Na voltage-gated channels, an inward recording and passing current (it is a continuous single-
(cid:2)
current I flowing through open Na channels will electrode voltage clamp technique, or cSEVC). The
Na
appear after a small delay (line 1c). Normally, this inward patch clamp technique was developed by Neher and
(cid:2)
current flowing through the open Na channels, I , Sakmann. By applying very low doses of acetylcholine
Na
should depolarize the membrane but in voltage clamp to a patch of muscle membrane they recorded for the first
experiments it does not: a current constantly equal to time, in 1976, the current flowing through a single

77
APPENDIX 4.3 PATCH CLAMP RECORDING
The patch pipette contains
The extracellular solution The intracellular solution
e i
Cell-attached patch e
i
i e
e
i
e i
Interface i
air–liquid
e
i
Excised patch Whole-cell patch
inside-out
i e
i
e
Excised patch
outside-out
i
e
i
i channel or unitary current
through a Na(cid:2) channel Perforated whole-cell patch
FIGURE A4.6 Configurations of patch clamp recording.
nicotinic cholinergic receptor channel (nAChR), the that has been fire polished to a diameter of about 1μm is
unitary nicotinic current. advanced towards a cell until it makes contact with its
Some of the advantages of the patch clamp tech- membrane. Under appropriate conditions, a gentle suc-
nique are that (i) with all but one configuration (cell- tion applied to the inside of the pipette causes the for-
attached configuration) the investigator has access to mation of a very tight seal between the membrane and
the intracellular environment (Figure A4.6); (ii) it the tip of the pipette. This is the cell-attached configur-
allows the recording of currents from cells too small ation (Figure A4.6). The resistance between the interior of
tobe impaled with intracellular microelectrodes; and the pipette and the external solution can be very large,
(iii) it allows the recording of unitary currents (current of the order of 10GΩ(109Ω) or more. It means that the
through a single channel). interior of the pipette is isolated from the extracellular
solution by the seal that is formed.
A4.3.1 The various patch clamp recording
This very large resistance is necessary for two reasons
configurations
(Figure A4.7):
First a tight seal between the membrane and the tip of • It allows the electrical isolation of the membrane
the pipette must be obtained. The tip of a micropipette patch under the tip of the pipette since practically

78 4. THE VOLTAGE-GATED CHANNELS OF Na(cid:2)ACTION POTENTIALS
current flowing through a population of identical
channels can be recorded, such that at steady state:
Amplifier Amplifier I(cid:6)Np i,
o
where N is the number of identical channels, p the
i o
seal probability that these channels are in the open state,
i channel i channel
Np the number of identical channels in the open state,
o
and ithe unitary current.
Good seal Bad seal
The advantages of this technique over the two-
i (cid:6) 0 pA i (cid:6) 0 pA electrode voltage clamp technique are: (i) the recording
i i under voltage clamp from cell bodies too small to be
impaled with two electrodes and even one; and (ii) there
Unitary inward currents
is a certain control over the composition of the internal
FIGURE A4.7 Good and bad seals. environment and a better signal-to-noise ratio. The
From The Axon Guide, Axon Instruments Inc., 1993. limitation of this technique is the gradual loss of intra-
cellular components (such as second messengers), which
will cause the eventual disappearance of the responses
dependent on those components.
no current can flow through the seal. This is import-
ant because if a fraction of the current passing
Perforated whole-cell configuration
through the membrane patch leaks out through the
seal, it is not measured by the electrode.
This is a variation of the whole-cell configuration, and
• It augments the signal-to-noise ratio since thermal
also allows the recording of current flowing through the
movement of the charges through a bad seal is a N channels open in the whole membrane but avoids
source of additional noise in the recording. Agood
washout of the intracellular solution. This configuration
seal thus enables the measurement of the current
is obtained by introducing into the recording pipette a
flowing through one single channel (unitary current)
molecule such as nystatin, amphotericin or gramicidin,
which is of the order of picoampères.
which will form channels in the patch of membrane
under the tip of the electrode. To record in this configu-
From the ‘cell-attached’ configuration (the last to be
ration, first the cell-attached configuration is obtained
explained), one can obtain other recording configur-
and then the experimenter waits for the nystatin chan-
ations. In total, three of them are used to record unitary
nels (or amphotericin or gramicidin channels) to form
currents, and one (whole-cell) to record the current
without applying any suction to the electrode. The
flowing through all the open channels of the whole cell
channels formed by these molecules are mainly per-
membrane.
meable to monovalent ions and thus allow electrical
access to the cell’s interior. Since these channels are not
permeant to molecules as large or larger than glucose,
Whole-cell configuration
whole-cell recording can be performed without remov-
This configuration is obtained from the cell-attached ing the intracellular environment. This is particularly
configuration. If a little suction is applied to the inter- useful when the modulation of ionic channels by second
ior of the pipette, it may cause the rupture of the messengers is studied.
membrane patch under the pipette. Consequently, In order to evaluate this problem of ‘washout’, we
the patch pipette now records the activity of the whole can calculate the ratio between the cell body volume
cell membrane (minus the small ruptured patch of and the volume of solution at the very end of a pipette.
membrane). Rapidly, the intracellular solution equili- For example, for a cell of 20μm diameter the volume is:
brates with that of the pipette, the volume of the latter
(4/3)π(10(cid:7)10(cid:3)6)3(cid:6)4(cid:7)10(cid:3)15
litres. If we consider
being many times larger. This is especially true for 1mm of the tip of the pipette, it contains a volume of the
inorganic ions. solution approximately equal to
10(cid:3)13l,
which is 100
This configuration enables the recording of the cur- times larger than the volume of the cell body.
rent flowing through the N channels open over the
entire surface of the cell membrane. Under conditions Excised patch configurations
where all the open channels are of the same type (with
the opening of other channels being blocked by pharma- If one wants to record the unitary current i flowing
cological agents or the voltage conditions), the total through a single channel and to control simultaneously

79
APPENDIX 4.3 PATCH CLAMP RECORDING
the composition of the intracellular environment, the with the patch clamp recording (with a Xenopusoocyte,
so-called excised or cell-free patch configurations have for example). Another method consists of replacing the
(cid:2)
to be used. The outside-out configuration is obtained extracellular medium with isotonic K (120–150mM).
from the whole-cell configuration by gently pulling The membrane potential under these conditions will
the pipette away from the cell. This causes the mem- be close to 0mV.
brane patch to be torn away from the rest of the cell at To leave the intracellular composition intact while
the same time that its free ends reseal together. In this recording the activity of a single channel is particularly
case the intracellular environment is that of the pipette, useful for studies of the modulation of an ionic channel
and the extracellular environment is that of the bath. by second messengers.
This configuration is used when rapid changes of the
extracellular solution are required to test the effects of A4.3.2 Principles of the patch clamp
different ions or pharmacological agents when applied recording technique
to the extracellular side of the membrane.
In the patch clamp technique, as in all voltage clamp
The inside-out configurationis obtained from the cell-
techniques, the membrane potential is held constant
attached configuration by gently pulling the pipette
(i.e. clamped) while the current flowing through a
away from the cell, lifting the tip of the pipette from
single open channel or many open channels (Np ) is
the bath in the air and putting it back into the solution o
measured (Figure A4.8). In the patch clamp technique
(interface of air–liquid). In this case, the intracellular
only one micropipette is used full time for both voltage
environment is that of the bath and the extracellular
clamping and current recording. How at the same time
one is that of the pipette (the pipette is filled with a
via the same pipette can the voltage of the membrane
pseudo-extracellular solution). This configuration is
be controlled and the current flowing throughthe mem-
used when rapid changes in the composition of the intra-
brane be measured?
cellular environment are necessary to test, for example,
When an operational amplifier A1 is connected as
the effects of different ions, second messengers and
shown in Figure A4.8awith a high megohm resistor R
pharmacological agents in that environment. f
(f(cid:6)feedback), a current-to-voltage converter is obtained.
The patch pipette is connected to the negative input
Cell-attached configuration and the command voltage (V ) to the positive one.
cmd
The resistor R can have two values: R (cid:6)1GΩ in the
The intracellular environment is that of the cell itself, f f
whole-cell configuration and 10GΩ in the excised
and the extracellular environment of the recorded
patch configurations.
membrane patch is the pipette solution. This configura-
tion enables the recording of current flowing through
How the membrane is clamped at a
the channel or channels present in the patch of mem-
voltage equal to V
cmd
brane that is under the pipette and is electrically isolated
from the rest of the cell. If one channel opens at a time, R represents the electrode resistance and R the
p m
then the unitary current iflowing through that channel membrane input resistance (Figure A4.8a). Suppose
can be recorded. The recordings in cell-attached mode that the membrane potential is first clamped to (cid:3)80mV
present two limitations: (i) the composition of the intra- (V (cid:6)(cid:3)80mV), then a voltage step to (cid:3)20mV is
cmd
cellularenvironment is not controlled; and (ii) the value applied for 100ms (V (cid:6)(cid:3)20mV for 100ms). The
cmd
of the membrane potential is not known and can only membrane potential (V ) has to be clamped quickly to
m
be estimated. (cid:3)20mV (V (cid:6)V (cid:6)(cid:3)20mV) whatever happens to
m cmd
Let us assume that the voltage in the interior of the the channels in the membrane (they open or close). The
patch pipette is maintained at a known value V operational amplifier A1 is able to minimize the volt-
p
(p(cid:6)pipette). Since the voltage across the membrane age difference between two inputs to a very small
patch is V (cid:6)V (cid:3)V (cid:6)V (cid:3)V , it will not be known value (0.1μV or so). A1 compares the value of V
m i e i p cmd
unless V, the voltage at the internal side of the mem- (entry (cid:2)) to that of V (entry (cid:3)). It then sends a voltage
i m
brane, is also known. V cannot be measured directly. output (V ) in order to obtain V (cid:6)V (cid:6)(cid:3)20mV
i o m cmd
One way to estimate this value is to measure the rest- (Figure A4.8b).
ing potential of several identical cells under similar What is this value of V ? Suppose that the at time t
o
(cid:2)
conditions (with intracellular or whole-cell record- of its peak the Na current evoked by the voltage step
ings), and to calculate an average V from the individ- to (cid:3)20mV is I (cid:6)1nA. V will force a current I(cid:6)
i Na o
ual values. Sometimes, however, V can be measured (cid:3)1nAto flow through R (cid:6)109 Ωin order to clamp the
i f
when the cell is large enough to allow a two-electrode membrane potential: V (cid:6)R I(cid:6)109(cid:7)10(cid:3)9(cid:6)1V. It is
o f
voltage clamp recording to be made simultaneously said that V (cid:6)1V/nAor 1mV/pA.
o

80 4. THE VOLTAGE-GATED CHANNELS OF Na(cid:2)ACTION POTENTIALS
R A4.3.3 The unitary current i is a rectangular
(a) f
step of current(see Figures 4.8a and c)
(cid:3)
Patch pipette R p V m (cid:2) A 1 conW fie g ure rc ao tr iod n, f o tor e ax ca tm ivp itl ye, i on f th a e s o inu gts li ed e v- oo lu tat gp ea t sc eh n c sla itm ivp e
(cid:2)
Na channel. When a positive membrane potential step
(cid:3)20
is applied to depolarize the patch of membrane from
Cell V cmd (cid:3)80 (cid:3)90mV to (cid:3)40mV, (cid:2) an inward current i Na flowing
through the open Na channel is recorded (inward cur-
rent means a current that flows across the membrane
Reference electrode
R from the outside to inside). By convention, inward cur-
m
rents are represented as downward deflections and
(b) R f
l outward currents as upward deflections.
f
(cid:3) I f The membrane depolarization causes activation of
R p V c (cid:2) V the voltage-dependent Na(cid:2) channel, and induces its
o transition from the closed (C) state (or conformation)
l to the open (O) state, a transition symbolized by:
f
i p V cmd C (cid:2) O,
l (cid:6) Σi where C is the closed state of the channel (at (cid:3)90mV)
l f R m l f f p and O is the open state of the channel (at (cid:3)40mV).
While the channel is in the O conformation
(at (cid:3)40mV), Na(cid:2) ions flow through the channel and
R
f (cid:2)
(c) an inward current caused by the net influx of Na ions
l
l p p (cid:3) l p is recorded. This current reaches its maximum value
A very rapidly. Thus, the maximal net ion flux is estab-
R p (cid:2) 1
lished almost instantaneously given the timescale
of the recording (of the order of microseconds). The
i
p development of the inward current thus appears as a
V vertical downward deflection.
cmd
Adelay between the onset of the voltage step and
the onset of the current iis observed. This delay has a
R
m duration that varies from one depolarizing test pulse
FIGURE A4.8 Example of a patch clamp recording in the to another and also according to the channel under
whole-cell configuration. study. This delay is due to the conformational change
(a) The amplifier compares V to the new V (cid:6)(cid:3)20mV. (b) The
m cmd or changes of the protein. In fact, such changes previ-
amplifier sends V so that V (cid:6)V (cid:6)(cid:3)20mV. Owing to the depolar-
ization to
(cid:3)20mVo
, the
Na(cid:2)cm hannecm lsd
open and unitary inward currents
ous to opening can be multiple:
i flow through the Nopen channels (Ni (cid:6)I ). (c) The whole-cell
cp urrent I flows through the circuit and is mep asurep d as a voltage change. C (cid:2) C (cid:2) C (cid:2) O
p 1 2 3
The limits of V in patch clamp amplifiers are (cid:2)15V Notice that the opening delay does not correspond
o
and (cid:3)15V. This means that V cannot be bigger than to the intrinsic duration of the process of conforma-
o
these values, which is largely compatible with biologi- tional change, which is extremely short. It corresponds
cal experiments where currents through the membrane to the statistical nature of the equilibrium between the
do not exceed 15nA. 2, 3, N closed and open conformations. The opening
The amplifier A1 compares V with V and sends delay therefore depends on the time spent in each of
m cmd
V at a very high speed. This speed has to be very high the different closed states (C , C , C ).
o 1 2 3
in order to correct V according to V very quickly. The return of the current value to zero corresponds
m cmd
The ideal clamp is obtained at the output of the circuit to the closing of the channel. This closure is the result
via R (black dot V on the scheme of Figure A4.8b). As of the transition of the channel protein from the open
f c
in the voltage clamp technique, a capacitive current is state (O) to a state in which the channel no longer con-
present at the beginning and at the end of the voltage ducts (state in which the aqueous pore is closed). It can
step on the current trace and a leak current during the be either a closed state (C), an inactivated state (I) or a
step, but they are not re-explained here. desensitized state (D). In the case of the Na(cid:2) channel,

81
APPENDIX 4.3 PATCH CLAMP RECORDING
the return of the current value to zero is due mainly to 20 mV
the transition of the protein from the open state to the
inactivated state (O :I). Before closing for a long time, V H (cid:6) (cid:3)40 i Ca
the channel can also flicker between the open and 1
closed state (C (cid:2) O):
2
C O I 3
4
Just as the current reaches its maximum value 5
instantaneously during opening, it also returns instan-
6
taneously to its zero value during closing of the pore.
1 pA
Because of this, the unitary current i has a step-like
20 ms
rectangular shape.
2
A4.3.4 Determination of the conductance
t t
of a channel o o
FIGURE A4.9 Example of the patch clamp recording of a single
If we repeat several times the experiment shown in voltage-dependent Ca(cid:2)channel.
Figure 4.8a, we observe that for a given voltage step In response to a voltage step to (cid:2)20mV from a holding potential of
ΔV, ivaries around an average value. The current fluc- (cid:3)40mV, the channel opens and closes several times during each of the
six trials. Adapted from Fox AP, Nowyky MC, Tsien RW (1987) Single-
tuations are measured at regular intervals before, dur-
channel recordings of three types of calcium channels in chick sen-
ing and immediately after the depolarizing voltage
sory neurones. J. Physiol. (Lond.)394, 173–200, with permission.
pulse. The distribution of the different ivalues during
the voltage pulse describes a Gaussian curve in which
• Two or more channels of differenttypes are present
the peak corresponds to the average ivalue (Figure 4.8d).
in the patch and their activity is simultaneously
There is also a peak around 0pA (not shown on the
recorded. The peaks correspond to the current
figure) which corresponds to the different values of
through different channel types.
i when the channel is closed. Since the channel is in
the closed state most of the time, where i has values
A4.3.5 Mean open time of a channel
around 0pA, this peak is higher than the one corre-
sponding to i channel (around (cid:3)2pA). The width of the An ionic channel fluctuates between a closed state
peak around 0pAgives the mean value of the fluctua- (C) and an open state (O):
tions resulting from noise. Therefore, the two main rea-
β
sons for these fluctuations of i are: the variations
channel C(cid:5)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:3)O
in the noise of the recording system and the changes in α
the number of ions that cross the channel during a unit
of time Δt. where α is the closing rate constant or, more exactly,
the number of channel closures per unit of time spent
Knowing the average value of i and the reversal
in the open state O. βis the opening rate constant or the
potential value of the current (E ), the average con-
rev
ductance value of the channel under study, γ, can be number of openings per unit of time spent in the
calculated: γ(cid:6)i/(V (cid:3)E ). closed state R (α and βare expressed in s(cid:3)1).
m rev
Once activated, the channel remains in the O state
However, there are cases in which the distribution
for a time t , called open time. When the channel
of ifor a give membrane potential shows several peaks. o
opens, the unitary current i is recorded for a certain
Different possibilities should be considered:
time t . t for a given channel studied under identical
o o
• Only one channel is being recorded from but it conditions varies from one recording to another
presents several open conformational states, each (Figure A4.9).t is an aleatory variable of an observed
o
one with different conductances. The peaks corre- duration. When the number of times a value of t (in
o
spond to the current flowing through these different the order of milli- or microseconds) is plotted against
substrates. the values of t , one obtains the open time histogram;
o
• Two or more channels of the sametype are present i.e. the distribution of the different values of t (Figure
o
in the patch and their activity recorded. The peaks A4.10). This distribution declines and the shorter open
represent the multiples of i(2i, 3i, etc.). times are more frequent than the longer ones.

82 4. THE VOLTAGE-GATED CHANNELS OF Na(cid:2)ACTION POTENTIALS
2a open at the beginning of any subsequent observation
interval Δt. This type of probability is described mathe-
b
matically as an exponential function of the observation
c time. Thus, when the openings of a homogeneous pop-
d ulation of channels are studied, the decrease in the
e number of events is described by a single exponential.
f
Experimental determination of τ , the mean open
g 0
time of a channel
h
i The mean open time τ o is the time during which a
channel has the highest probability of being in the open
200 state: it corresponds to the sum of all the values that t
o
may take, weighted by their corresponding probability
values. This value is easy to calculate if the distribution
is described by a single exponential. In order to verify
100 that the histogram is actually described by a single
exponential, one has to first build the histogram by
plotting the number of times a value of t is observed as
o
a function of t ; i.e. number of events(cid:6)f(t ).
o o
0 The exponential that describes the histogram has
0 0 the form y(cid:6)y e(cid:3)t/τ0, where yis the number of events
Open time (ms) o
observed at each time t. This curve will be linear on
semi-logarithmic coordinates if it is described by a sin-
gle exponential. The slope can be measured with a
regression analysis. It corresponds to the mean open
time τ of the channel. τ is the value of t for a number
o o o
Why does the distribution of t decrease? of events equal to 1/e. It is the ‘expected value’ of t .
o o
The expected value of t is the sum of all the values of
The histogram is constructed as follows. At time o
t weighted to their corresponding probabilities.
t(cid:6)0, all the channels are open (the delay of opening is o In the case of the conformational changes C (cid:2) O,
ignored, all the openings are aligned at time 0; Figure the value of τ provides an estimate of the closure rate
A4.10). As time tincreases, the number of channels that constant α, beo cause at steady state τ (cid:6)1/α. For exam-
remain open can only decrease since channels progres- o
ple, from the open time histogram of the nicotinic recep-
sively close. This can also be expressed as follows: the tor channel, we can determine its mean open time τ .
longer the observation time, the lower the probability o
Knowing that in conditions where the desensitization of
that the channel is still in the open state. Or, alterna- the channel is negligible τ (cid:6)1/α, we can calculated
tively, the longer the observation time, the closer the from τ the closing rate co onstant of the channel. If
probability will be to 1 that the channel will shut (1 is the τ (cid:6)1.1o ms, α(cid:6)900s(cid:3)1. The channel closes 900 times
maximum value used to express a probability). It is not o
for each second spent in the open state. In other words
a Gaussian curve because the delay of opening is
there is an average of 900 transitions of the channel to
ignored and all the openings begin at t(cid:6)0.
the closed state for each second spend in the open state.
Why is the decrementing distribution of t
o
exponential?
Achannel open at t(cid:6)0 has a probability of closing at
t(cid:2)Δt. It has the same probability of closing if it is still
sgninepo
fo
rebmuN
FIGURE A4.10 Determination of the mean open time of a
channel.
Trial 2 of Figure A4.9 is selected and all the openings are aligned at
time 0. τ (cid:6)1.2ms.
o



1/7/25, 2:28 AM Biogenic Amine Neurotransmitters (Section 1, Chapter 12, Part 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscience…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 1: Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology
Search
Chapter 12: Biogenic Amine Neurotransmitters
Jack C. Waymire, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
Revised 28 July 2020
12.1 Introduction
Monoamines (also known as "biogenic amines") include three classes of neurotransmitters:
Catecholamines
Dopamine (DA), norepinephrine (NE, also called noradrenaline) and epinephrine (E, also called adrenaline) make
up a class of neurotransmitters named on the basis of the hydroxylated phenol ring termed a catechol nucleus.
Indolamines
Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine; 5-HT); is the principal member of this group of compounds. The name serotonin is
derived from the fact that this substance was first isolated from the serum based on its ability to cause an increase in
blood pressure. Melatonin, a second indolamine, is restricted to the pineal and is released into the blood stream in a
manner that is regulated by the diurnal cycle. Melatonin will not be covered further in this chapter.
Histamine
Histamine has been recognized as a neurotransmitter in the CNS only within the past fifteen years.
The structure of the monoamine neurotransmitters is shown in Figure 12.1.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter12.html 1/14

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Biogenic Amine Neurotransmitters (Section 1, Chapter 12, Part 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscience…
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 12.1
Structure of the monoamine neurotransmitters.
12.2 Anatomy of Catecholamines
Catecholamines are neurotransmitters in a sympathetic limb of the autonomic nervous system and in the CNS.
12.3 Autonomic Nervous Systems
As shown in Figure 12.2, norepinephrine is a neurotransmitter in postganglionic sympathetic neurons where it acts on smooth
muscle to cause either contraction or relaxation, depending on the types of receptors present (see below). DA is a neurotransmitter
in autonomic ganglia where it modulates cholinergic transmission and in the kidney, where it produces renal vasodilation and
inhibits Na+ and H O reabsorption. Epinephrine and norepinephrine are neurohumoral agents released into the circulation by the
2
adrenal medulla. The ratio of E to NE released is 4 to 1.
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 12.2
Location of NE and Epi at sympathetic nerve endings and in
the adrenal medulla.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter12.html 2/14

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Biogenic Amine Neurotransmitters (Section 1, Chapter 12, Part 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscience…
12.4 Central Nervous System
Generally, the cell bodies of catecholamine neurons are found in clusters in the brain stem or midbrain and project to other regions
of the brain and spinal cord. NE, for example, projects to almost every area of the brain. In contrast, DA has a more restricted
projection. Epinephrine, which will not be covered in this chapter, has the most restricted distribution.
12.5 Dopamine - Anatomy
Cross Reference: Links for The major site of DA cell bodies is the midbrain. These
Dopamine
clusters of cells give rise to four DA systems shown in
Anatomy
Cell Biology Figure 12.3:
Physiology
Clinical 1. Mesostriatal system (blue and red in Figure 12.3),
2. Mesolimbocortical system (purple in Figure 12.3),
3. Periventricular system (orange in Figure 12.3), and
4. Tuberohypophyseal system. (green in Figure 12.3).
Mesostriatal DA System - The mesostriatal DA system, referred to as the
nigrostriatal pathway, is composed of two components, a dorsal mesostriatal
pathway and a ventral mesostriatal pathway. These two pathways are important
c 2000 UTHSCH
for movement control and reward mechanisms.
The dorsal mesostriatal pathway (blue) originates in the substantia nigra par Figure 12.3
compacta and ascends to innervate the corpus striatum (caudate, putamen, and Location of DA in the rat CNS
globus pallidus), where it modulates the output of the corpus striatum. The
destruction of the nigrostriatal cells in Parkinson's disease produces marked
motor deficits.
The ventral mesostriatal pathway (red) also originates in the substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area, and innervates the
nucleus accumbens, olfactory tubercles and medial caudate-putamen. The ventral nigrostriatal pathway plays an important role
in positive incentive characteristics of rewarding behaviors and the psychostimulants, as will be discussed further in Chapter 12,
Part 10.
Mesolimbocortical DA System - The Mesolimbocortical DA system (purple) originates in the midbrain and projects to limbic
structures (septum, amygdala, hippocampus, olfactory nucleus, and limbic cortex). This DA system is believed to participate in
schizophrenia. (See Chapter 12, Part 11) The current hypothesis is that an increase in DA function in the mesolimbic system and
a decreased function in the mesocortical DA systems occur in schizophrenia.
Periventricular DA System - The periventricular DA system (orange in Fig. 12.3) coordinates motivated behavior. These DA cells
originate in the periventricular region of hypothalamus and send short axons to several thalamic and hypothalamic nuclei.
Collaterals also descend to the intermediolateral cell column of the spinal cord to synapse with sympathetic preganglionic neurons.
This dual innervation of hypothalamic and sympathetic preganglionic neurons is believed to integrate the central and autonomic
components of motivated behaviors, including behaviors such as sex, thirst and appetite.
Tuberohypophyseal DA System - The tuberohypophyseal DA system mediates the control of milk production during lactation. The
DA cells (green) originate in the periventricular and arcuate nuclei of the hypothalamus and project to the median eminence of the
hypothalamus where they release DA into the capillary plexus of the hypophyseal-portal system. DA travels to the anterior pituitary
where it inhibits the release of prolactin, the hormone that stimulates milk production in lactating animals.
12.6 Norepinephrine - Anatomy
The major site of NE cell bodies is the medulla and pons. The NE cells consist of
three main groups shown in Figure 12.4:
1. locus coeruleus complex (purple and red in Figure 12.4),
2. lateral tegmental system (blue in Figure 12.4), and
3. dorsal medullary system (green in Figure 12.4).
In all three cases the neurons project diffusely to broad regions of the brain
where their nerve terminals lack conventional synaptic junctions. Release of
transmitter from these cells is described as volume transmission, because
NE, once released, is thought to diffuse and influence a number of adjacent
cells. c 2000 UTHSCH
Locus Coeruleus System - The locus coeruleus (LC-purple and red) is considered Figure 12.4
the most influential of the cell groups even though it consists of less than 2,000 Location of NE in the rat CNS.
cells on either side of the midline. This importance is because LC axons project
rostrally via the dorsal noradrenergic bundle to innervate nearly the entire
telencephalon and diencephalon, as well as dorsally to innervate the cerebellum and caudally to innervate the spinal cord. The
nerve fibers are so highly ramified in the terminal fields such that each axon may branch as many as 100,000 times. This pattern of
innervation enables the LC to synchronously modulate cellular activity across wide expanses of the cortex.
Lateral Tegmental System - The axons of the lateral tegmental system (blue) project caudally to the intermediolateral cell
column of the spinal cord where they inhibit sympathetic preganglionic cells, and ventrally to the hypothalamus. The joint
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter12.html 3/14

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Biogenic Amine Neurotransmitters (Section 1, Chapter 12, Part 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscience…
innervation of the hypothalamus and the intermediolateral column cells is believed to be the basis for NE integration of central and
peripheral sympathetic autonomic function.
Dorsal Medullary System - As a complement to the lateral tegmental system, the dorsal medullary system (green) projects to the
nucleus solitarius, as well as to the brain stem nuclei that control cranial parasympathetic function (glossopharyngeal, facial, and
trigeminal- nuclei and the dorsal vagal nuclear complex). These NE systems are believed to provide control of the cranial
parasympathetic system in a manner analogous to the lateral tegmental system's control of the sympathetic system.
12.7 Epinephrine - Anatomy
Cross Reference: Links for (Note: there is no figure for epinephrine anatomy)
Norepinephrine
Anatomy
Two clusters of epinephrine (E) cells are located in the medullary reticular formation. One cluster of cells in
Cell Biology
Physiology the ventrolateral medulla sends ascending projections to innervate the periaqueductal gray and several
Clinical hypothalamic and olfactory nuclei. This cluster also sends a descending projection to innervate the
sympathetic preganglionic cells of the intermediolateral column in a manner analogous to the NE lateral
tegmental system. The second group of cells, located in the dorsomedial medulla near the floor of the fourth ventricle, project to
several parasympathetic cranial nerve nuclei (similar to the dorsal medullary NE system, described above). These adrenergic cells
are believed to coordinate eating and various visceral functions including the regulation of blood pressure.
12.8 Serotonin - Anatomy
Cross Reference: Links for Serotonin As shown in Figure 12.5, serotonin cells are
Anatomy located in two clusters:
Cell Biology
Physiology
Clinical 1. a caudal system in the medulla (B1-B4, green
in Figure 12.5)
2. a rostral system in the midbrain (B5-B9, purple and blue in Figure
12.5).
Both project widely throughout the CNS.
Caudal System: The caudal cluster of 5-HT cells (B1-B4) is located close
to the midline and project caudally to the spinal cord dorsal and ventral
horns as well as the intermediolateral cell column. These pathways are
believed to mediate the role of 5-HT in sensory, motor and autonomic c 2000 UTHSCH
functions, respectively.
Figure 12.5
Rostral System: The rostral midbrain cluster of cells (B5-B9), (raphe 5-HT neuronal pathways in the rat CNS are in two
nuclei) are distributed throughout the midbrain. A cluster of cells located clusters of cells, one in the caudal brain stem (B1-B4)
medially and another located dorsally provide over 80% of the 5-HT and the other in the rostral brainstem (B5-B9)
innervation of the forebrain. These cells project to the diencephalon,
basal ganglia, limbic system, cortex, mesencephalic gray and inferior and
superior colliculi. Some evidence supports the conclusion that the innervation of forebrain structures by serotonergic processes is
complementary to that of NE. Another important aspect of 5-HT microanatomy is that two distinct patterns of innervation exist for
these medial and dorsal systems. The dorsal system is similar in its anatomy to that of catecholamine neurons with thin diffusely
branching axons lacking classic synaptic contacts (volume neurotransmission). The medial system, in contrast, appears to have
classical synapses and is characterized by the presence of thick axons with large round nerve endings that make extensive synaptic
contacts. These differences imply a marked difference in the physiological function of these two 5-HT systems.
Other Systems: In addition to the above two pathways, another 5-HT pathway projects partially from one of the rostral nuclei (B5)
and partially from two caudal nuclei (B2 & B3, dark green in Figure 12.5) to innervate the cerebellar cortex and deep cerebellar
nuclei. There is also a widespread 5-HT projection to structures within the brainstem, including the locus coeruleus, several cranial
nuclei, inferior olivary nucleus, and nucleus solitarius.
12.9 Histamine - Anatomy
Cross Reference: Links for Histamine cells (HA) are located exclusively in
Histamine
the basal posterior hypothalamus. These cells
Anatomy
Cell Biology project extensively throughout the neural axis
Clinical in a manner analogous to the NE and 5-HT
systems. Although HA has not been
investigated extensively, based on its diffuse innervation of the CNS and
lack of classic synaptic contacts, it is likely that histamine has a broad
behavioral and physiological function.
Histamine is also the major active substance released from mast cells.
The presence of mast cells in the blood in the CNS has hindered the
analysis of the role of histamine as a neurotransmitter.
c 2000 UTHSCH
12.10 Introduction to Cell Biology
Figure 12.6
The monoamines will be considered as a group in discussing the cell Histamine neuronal pathways mapped in the rat CNS
biology of their 1) synthesis, 2) storage and 3) release. Monoamine using histidine decarboxylase immunoreactivity.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter12.html 4/14

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Biogenic Amine Neurotransmitters (Section 1, Chapter 12, Part 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscience…
receptors and termination of action of each monoamine will be considered separately.
12.11 Cell Biology - Biosynthesis of Monoamines
All monoamine (MA) neurotransmitters are synthesized from amino acids through a series of enzyme catalyzed reactions in which
hydroxylation, decarboxylation and/or methylation convert the precursor amino acid into the active monoamine neurotransmitter.
Biosynthesis of Dopamine (DA), Norepinephrine (NE), and 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)
Biosynthesis of all monoamines occurs primarily in the nerve terminal. As shown in Figure 12.7, the first step in the synthesis of
catecholamines (DA and NE, as well as E, not shown) is the hydroxylation of the tyrosine to form DOPA. An analogous reaction,
the hydroxylation of tryptophan to 5 hydroxytryptophane (5-HTP) is the first step in the biosynthesis of 5-HT. Both tyrosine
hydroxylase and tryptophan hydroxylase are the rate-limiting steps in the biosynthetic pathway of the respective monoamines.
Both enzymes are mixed function mono-oxygenases requiring molecular oxygen, iron and the cofactor, tetrahydrobiopterin (BH )
4
for activity. BH is converted to BH during the hydroxylation and must be regenerated to BH in order for monoamine biosynthesis
4 2 4
to continue. As shown in Figure 12.7, the enzyme pteridine reductase regenerates the active cofactor. Pteridine reductase is
therefore also an essential enzyme in the synthesis of catecholamines. The next step in the biosynthesis of monoamines is the
decarboxylation by aromatic amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) to form the corresponding monoamine (Dopamine and 5
hydroxytryptamine 5-HT, respectively). NE is then formed from dopamine through an additional reaction, the hydroxylation of the
2nd carbon of the DA side chain. This last hydroxylation step occurs within the monoamine storage vesicle (see Figure 12.9a) and is
catalyzed by dopamine β hydroxylase.
c 2000 UTHSCH c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 12.7a Figure 12.7b
Biosynthesis of the DA and NE precursor L-DOPA and the 5-HT precursor 5-HTP through hydroxylation
using tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and tryptophan hydroxylase (TryH.) These intermediates are then
decarboxylated by a nonspecific decarboxylase, aromatic amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) to form the
respective monoamines. Pteridine reductase regenerates the cofactor BH .Biosynthesis of the DA and
4
NE precursor L-DOPA and the 5-HT precursor 5-HTP through hydroxylation using tyrosine hydroxylase
(TH) and tryptophan hydroxylase (TryH.) These intermediates are then decarboxylated by a nonspecific
decarboxylase, aromatic amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) to form the respective monoamines.
Pteridine reductase regenerates the cofactor BH .
4
Two additional cofactors are required for the synthesis of monoamines; vitamin B6 is necessary as a cofactor for AADC catalyzed
decarboxylation. Vitamin C is required as a cofactor for DA conversion to NE in the storage vesicle (see Figure 12.9a).
Biosynthesis of Epinephrine (E)
Epinephrine is synthesized in adrenal medulla and CNS by methylation of NE on the amino-terminus (not shown). The enzyme that
catalyzes this reaction is phenyl ethanolamine N methyl transferase (PNMT). This enzyme uses S-adenosyl methionine as the
methyl donor to methylate norepinephrine to form epinephrine (the nor refers to the lack of the methyl group). PNMT's localization
outside the storage vesicle requires that norepinephrine shuttle out of the vesicle to be converted to epinephrine and then back into
the storage vesicle for storage and release.
Biosynthesis of Histamine (HA)
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter12.html 5/14

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Biogenic Amine Neurotransmitters (Section 1, Chapter 12, Part 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscience…
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 12.8
Biosynthesis of histamine from histidine.
As shown in Figure 12.8, in contrast to the catecholamines and 5-HT, the biosynthesis of histamine does not require hydroxylation.
Histamine is the product of the decarboxylation of the amino acid, histidine, to form the monoamine, histamine, in a single step
that is analogous to the decarboxylation of DOPA and 5-HTP. A different enzyme is used to decarboxylate histidine, histidine
decarboxylase, as shown in Figure 12.8. This enzyme, like AADC, requires vitamin B6.
Regulation of Catecholamine Biosynthesis
The concentration of catecholamines in nerve terminals remains relatively constant despite frequent fluctuations in neuronal
activity. This homeostasis is achieved through the regulation of TH activity. TH is phosphorylated and activated by both calcium
and cAMP dependent protein kinases. A longer-term regulation of CA synthesis also occurs. This regulation is mediated through
altered transcription of TH mRNA and altered TH mRNA stability. Both mechanisms lead to increased levels of TH protein.
Regulation of Serotonin Biosynthesis
The level of serotonin is regulated principally by the amount of tryptophan available to serotonergic neurons. This has two
important implications for the level of serotonin in the brain. First, because tryptophan is not synthesized in mammals, the level of
tryptophan available for serotonin biosynthesis is dependent on diet. Thus, diets high in tryptophan can markedly elevate serotonin
levels. Second, because tryptophan is transported across the blood brain barrier by a transport system which also transports
certain other amino acids, diets high in these amino acids can reduce the level of serotonin in the brain by competing with
tryptophan for transport into the CNS. As will be discussed later, altered serotonin level in the CNS can have marked consequences
on behavior.
Regulation of Histamine Biosynthesis
Thus far the mechanism for the regulation of histamine biosynthesis is unknown.
12.12 Storage of Monoamines
Monoamine neurotransmitters are stored in vesicles that appear dark at the EM level and are thus referred to as dense core
vesicles. MA neurotransmitters are stored at a high concentration and are complexed with ATP and several proteins called
chromogranins. One of these chromogranins is the enzyme, dopamine β hydroxylase (DβH), that converts DA to NE. As shown
in Figure 12.9, MA neurotransmitters are taken into the vesicles by an exchange of H+ for the MA. In NE cells DA is taken up and
converted to NE by DβH. As described above in the synthesis section, DβH hydroxylates the amino side chain. The uptake of MA
neurotransmitters into storage vesicles is inhibited by the drug reserpine.
c 2000 UTHSCH c 2000 UTHSCH
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter12.html 6/14

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Biogenic Amine Neurotransmitters (Section 1, Chapter 12, Part 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscience…
Figure 12.9a Figure 12.9b
An antiporter that exchanges protons for monoamines (MA) mediates storage of
monoamines in dense core vesicles. Left: In NE cells, DA is taken up then converted to NE
within the vesicle by the enzyme DBH. Right: All other monoamine cells merely store the
MA neurotransmitters.
12.13 Release of Monoamines
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 12.10
MA release and interaction with both presynaptic and
postsynaptic receptors.
Neuronal activation elicits the release of MA neurotransmitters by a calcium-dependent exocytosis, as described in Lecture 10,
under Secretory Mechanism. The vesicular contents are released from the nerve terminal into the extracellular space during
secretion. Because there is no classic postsynaptic specialization associated with the majority of MA nerve endings, the released MA
neurotransmitters diffuse to postsynaptic cells in the vicinity where they stimulate MA receptors (volume neurotransmission).
MA neurotransmitters also act on the presynaptic cell, as shown in Figure 12.10 to influence their cell biology in a feed back
manner. The interaction with the presynaptic receptors (termed autoreceptors) can both stimulate MA biosynthesis and inhibit the
further release of neurotransmitter. Both the pre- and postsynaptic MA receptors are G protein linked, seven trans-membrane
receptors. Their structure is similar to the muscarinic receptors discussed in the Lecture 11, Cholinergic Neurotransmission.
12.14 Properties of Monoamine Receptors
The vast majority of the MA receptors are seven transmembrane, G-protein coupled receptors (GPCR) that mediate MA action
through one of a few mechanisms. These are the same mechanisms employed by other GPCR, such as the muscarinic receptors
(Chapter 12, Part 5) and GPC-glutamate receptors (Chapter 13, Part 3). These mechanisms are:
1. Stimulation or inhibition of adenylyl cyclase (Click here to see mechanism),
2. Stimulation of PLCβ or PLA (Click here to see mechanism), and
3. Direct action on ion channel (Click here to see mechanism).
As will be described below, one type of MA receptor, 5-HT , is unusual in that it is NOT LINKED TO G PROTEIN LINKED RECEPTORS.
3
Instead, 5-HT receptors are ligand gated ion channels, similar in structure and function to ionotropic nicotinic cholinergic
3
receptors and glutamate receptors.
12.15 NE and E Receptors
The receptors for NE and E were originally classified based on the observation that some physiological actions were mimicked by
the catecholamine analog, isoproterenol, whereas others were not. This observation led to the convention that actions that could
be mimicked by isoproterenol were classified as mediated by β-receptors. Those actions that were not mimicked by isoproterenol
were classified as mediated by α-receptors.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter12.html 7/14

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Biogenic Amine Neurotransmitters (Section 1, Chapter 12, Part 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscience…
12.16 Relationship Between Peripheral NE and E Receptor Type, Location and Effector
Mechanism
This classification has since been extended to include subclasses of α and β receptors based on the capacity of drugs to selectively activate (or
block) specific physiological responses to NE and E. The molecular cloning of mRNAs for distinct subclasses of NE and E receptors also aided
in the classification of receptors. Tables I, II and III summarize autonomic and CNS NE and E receptor types, their location and their
physiological action. Noteworthy is the fact that most α receptor responses are excitatory, while most β responses are inhibitory (although some
exceptions exist, e.g. cardiac muscle). Also, the α receptor is invariably linked to IP production, whereas the β receptor is associated with
3
increased levels of cAMP.
Table I
Relationship Between Peripheral NE and E Receptor Type,
Location, and Effector Mechanism
Class Location Synaptic Action Linked to:
α Uterine muscle Contraction IP 3 production
α Blood vessels Constriction IP 3 production
α Bladder Contraction IP 3 production
α Spleen Contraction IP 3 production
α Iris Pupil dilation ?
Increased rate and force
β 1 Heart of contraction Increased cAMP
β 2 Blood vessels Relaxation Increased cAMP
β 2 Bronchial muscle Relaxation Increased cAMP
β 2 Bladder Relaxation Increased cAMP
β 2 Spleen Relaxation Increased cAMP
β 3 Fat cells Lipolysis Increased cAMP
12.17 Relationship Between CNS NE Receptor Type and Effector Mechanism
The distribution of NE receptors in the CNS is complex and not yet well resolved. Generally, both α and β receptors are believed to
be modulators of the actions of other neurotransmitters. As summarized in Table II, α receptors are often excitatory, acting via
1
IP . In contrast, α receptors are inhibitory acting via decreased levels of cAMP. β receptors are inhibitory and act through
3 2
increased levels of cAMP (TABLE II). The anatomical location of the specific receptor subtypes is not yet clearly delineated.
Table II
Relationship Between CNS NE Receptor Type and Effector
Mechanism
Class Synaptic Action Signaling Mechanism
α 1 Slow depolarization IP 3 production
α 2 Slow hyperpolarization Decreased cAMP
β 1 Decreased excitability Increased cAMP
β 2 Decreased excitability Increased cAMP
12.18 DA Receptors
In the CNS, dopamine receptors, designated by the letter D, are grouped into two large families based on cDNA-derived structural
similarities, synaptic action and signaling mechanism (TABLE III). The D family (D and D ) increases cAMP level, and has a
1 1 5
positive influence on the excitability of its target cell. The D family (D , D , and D ) decreases cAMP level and decreases the
2 2 3 4
excitability of the target cell. As shown in Table III the two families of receptors appear to have similar anatomical distributions.
However, this may be misleading. Future research will probably show that the location of the receptors is on distinct postsynaptic
cells or on presynaptic versus postsynaptic sites.
12.19 Relationship Between CNS Dopamine Receptor Type, Location, and Effector
Mechanism
Table III
Signaling
Class Location Synaptic Action
Mechanism
D family Caudate -putamen, nucleus accumbens,
1
olfactory tubercles, hippocampus, Increased excitability Increased cAMP
(D , D )
1 5 hypothalamus
D family Caudate -putamen, nucleus accumbens,
2
olfactory tubercles, frontal cortex, Decreased excitability Decreased cAMP
(D , D , D )
2 3 4 diencephalon, brain stem
12.20 5-HT Receptors
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter12.html 8/14

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Biogenic Amine Neurotransmitters (Section 1, Chapter 12, Part 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscience…
All but one of the 5-HT receptors belongs to the G protein coupled receptor superfamily. The one exception is the 5-HT receptor,
3
which is a ligand gated ion channel. As is apparent from the summary in Table IV, 5-HT mediated actions occur through the same
types of second messenger mechanisms as cholinergic and catecholamine G protein linked receptors.
Two classes of 5-HT receptors, 5-HT and 5-HT , appear to predominantly act as autoreceptors to modulate the synthesis and
1B 1D
release of 5-HT from the presynaptic terminal of serotonergic neurons. Other receptor types lead to an increase in the excitability of
the target cell (5-HT and 5-HT ), while still others (5-HT ) decrease excitability. Interestingly, receptors that mediate increased
2 4 1
excitability do so through at least three mechanisms, PLCβ stimulation, stimulation of adenylyl cyclase or the direct interaction of 5-
HT with the ion channel to depolarize the membrane.
12.21 Relationship Between CNS 5-HT Receptor Type and Effector Mechanism
Table IV
Class Receptor Type Synaptic Action Signaling Mechanism
1) Decreased cAMP
5-HT 1A G protein linked Decreased excitability (increased 2) direct K+ channel opening by
K+ conductance) G proteins
Autoreceptor-mediated decreased
5-HT 1B G protein linked 5-HT release Decreased cAMP
5-HT
1E
G protein linked ? Decreased cAMP
5-HT
1F
Autoreceptor-mediated decreased
5-HT 1D G protein linked 5-HT release Decreased cAMP
Increased excitability
5-HT 2 G protein linked (decreased K+ conductance) IP 3 production
Increased excitability Increased cAMP followed by
5-HT 4 G protein linked (decreased K+ conductance) phosphorylation of K+ channels
Ligand gated
Ligand gated pentameric cation Increased Na+, K+ and Ca2+
5-HT 3 pentameric cation channel Rapid depolarization conductance
channel
12.22 Histamine Receptors
Three subtypes of histamine receptors have been identified. All three are G protein linked and all three are present in the CNS as
well as the periphery. Thus far, only peripheral H receptors have been characterized (See Table V).
12.23 Relationship Between CNS and Peripheral Histamine Receptor Type, Location and
Effector Mechanism
H receptors mediate the well-known physiological responses to histamine that occur in response to histamine liberation from
1
mast cells. A large number of prescription and over the counter drugs, antihistamines, act by blocking H receptors. Because
1
most H blockers also have a sedative effect and cause drowsiness, it appears likely that H receptors are also present in the CNS.
1 1
Recently developed H blockers that do not cross that blood brain barrier have circumvented the sedative problem.
1
The mechanism of action of H
1
receptors is the activation of PLCβ
H receptors are responsible for the peripheral actions of histamine that are not blocked by H antagonists. These receptors are
2 1
coupled to stimulation of cAMP and are responsible for histamine's stimulation of gastric acid secretion. Recently developed specific
H receptor blockers, Tagamet and Zantac, are effective clinically for excess secretion of gastric acid. Because these drugs do not
2
cross the blood brain barrier, they have no effects on the CNS.
H histamine receptors are found on histamine nerve terminals where they regulate the release of histamine. There is evidence
3
for these receptors on the terminals of other neurotransmitter types as well, indicating that histamine may regulate the synthesis
and secretion of other neurotransmitters. When presynaptic receptors are located on cells other than their own neurotransmitter
type they are called heteroreceptors.
Table V
Relationship Between CNS and Peripheral Histamine Receptor Type, Location and
Effector Mechanism
Class Receptor Type Location and Synaptic Action Signaling Mechanism
1. Peripherally - contraction of smooth
muscle, fluid secretion from respiratory
passage cells, increased release of
H 1 G protein linked catecholamines from adrenal medulla IP 3 production
2. CNS, wide spread, especially
hypothalamus; actions unknown
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter12.html 9/14

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Biogenic Amine Neurotransmitters (Section 1, Chapter 12, Part 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscience…
1. Peripherally - contraction of smooth
muscle and gastric acid secretion
H 2 G protein linked 2. CNS, wide spread, especially the striatum, Increased cAMP
actions unknown
not determined- 1. CNS, wide spread on nerve endings -
H 3 probably G protein mediates decreased neurotransmitter Decreased cAMP
linked release
12.24 Inactivation of MA Neurotransmitters by Reuptake and Metabolism
The major mechanism for the inactivation of secreted MA is the reuptake into the nerve terminal from which the MA was released.
Under conditions of very high neuronal activity, the MA will also be taken up by neighboring glial cells and will overflow into the
capillaries perfusing the CNS. Under all three situations, a portion of the MA will be metabolized by enzymes that inactivate the MA,
converting them to inactive products. As described below, measurement of these metabolites is used clinically and in research to
monitor the activity of the MA systems.
12.25 Reuptake of MA Neurotransmitters
High affinity transport (reuptake) into axon terminals is the main process of inactivation of released monoamines. Reuptake
requires sodium ions and a source of energy (e.g., ATP) and is mediated by a protein carrier located on the plasma membrane of
the monamine neurons. Tricyclic antidepressants and cocaine inhibit the transporters for DA, NE and 5-HT. Within the past ten
years the structure of several MA transporters has been determined and shown to consist of a twelve transmembrane protein with
both the N and C terminal ends residing within the cytoplasm (Figure 12.11). The powerful addictive drugs cocaine and
amphetamine increase the level of MA neurotransmitters in the extracellular space. Cocaine acts by blocking the transport of MA
(Figure 12.11) neurotransmitters into the terminal and as a consequence increases MA in the extracellular space. In contrast,
amphetamine reverses the transport direction (Figure 12.11), transporting MA neurotransmitters out of the nerve terminal.
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 12.11
Reuptake of MA neurotransmitters by a
transporter with a twelve transmembrane
structure.
A low affinity uptake of monoamines into surrounding glial cells also inactivates released monoamines. Because this process
acts only at very high concentrations of monoamines, it is believed to only come into play when the concentration of released
neurotransmitter is very high.
A portion of released catecholamines diffuse to the extracellular space where monoamine oxidase (MAO) and/or catechol-0-
methyl-transferase (COMT) eventually catabolize it. This route of inactivation is more prominent following extremely high levels
of catecholaminergic neuronal activity.
12.26 Metabolism of MA Neurotransmitters
Catecholamines and 5-HT: The enzymatic metabolism of MA neurotransmitters is carried out by MAO, COMT and histamine
methyl transferase. These enzymes are widely distributed in tissues.
Monoamine Oxidase (MAO): This metabolic enzyme is located on the outer membrane of the mitochondrion and metabolizes DA,
NE and 5-HT by oxidative deamination of (see Figure 12.12) to the corresponding aldehyde (DHPA, DHPGA and 5HIAA,
respectively). DHPA and PHPGA are aldehyde intermediates that must be further metabolized by aldehyde reductase or
dehydrogenase to alcohols and acids, respectively. These metabolites are excreted (see Table VI below), or further metabolized by
methylation through the action of catechol-O-methyltransferase and then excreted (see below). Pargyline, an irreversible inhibitor
of MAO, blocks monoamine degradation.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter12.html 10/14

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Biogenic Amine Neurotransmitters (Section 1, Chapter 12, Part 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscience…
c 2000 UTHSCH c 2000 UTHSCH c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 12.12a Figure 12.12b Figure 12.12c
The deamination of three monoamine by mitochondrial MAO.
Catechol-O-methyl-transferase (COMT): This extraneuronal enzyme inactivates catecholamines by methylation of the hydroxyls
on the catechol ring. COMT methylates either catecholamines that have already been metabolized by MAO or those that have not.
The metabolites of catecholamines are shown in Table VI.
Measurement of MA metabolites in CSF, blood or urine provides a useful clinical index of the rate of release or turnover of MA
neurotransmitters. Metabolites of catecholamines and serotonin are assayed in the CSF to obtain an index of brain metabolites. This
method has been only modestly useful in determining the role of a specific MA neurotransmitters in brain disorders. Likewise,
specific catecholamine metabolites in urine or the blood provide an index of peripheral sympathetic neurons and adrenal medullary
catecholamines. The metabolites that are routinely measured clinically to assess CNS and peripheral catecholamine function are
summarized in Table VI. Two CSF metabolites provide a measure of central DA function: 1) HVA, a methylated DA metabolite
(metabolized by both MAO and COMT), and 2) DOPAC, an un-methylated metabolite, (metabolized by only MAO). The CSF
metabolite that is measured to assess central NE function is MHPG, a methylated NE metabolite (metabolized by MAO and COMT).
The metabolite that provides the best index of autonomic nervous system activity is VMA, a methylated NE metabolite
(metabolized by both MAO and COMT). Metanephrine levels are monitored to assess the relative activity of the adrenal medulla or
a tumor of this tissue, phaeochromocytoma. 5-HIAA reflects the activity of 5-HT cells.
Histamine: The metabolism of HA is somewhat different than the other MA. HA is taken up into cells where it is first methylated by
histamine methyltransferase (HMT) to form telemethylhistamine. MAO subsequently oxidizes telemethylhistamine to the histamine
metabolite, telemethylimadazole (TMI).
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 12.13
The metabolism of HA through methylation and
deamination.
Table VI
Summary of Major Monoamine Metabolites
Substrate Enzymes Metabolites Source
Dopamine MAO DOPAC Brain
COMT; MAO HVA Brain
PNS
Norepinephrine MAO; COMT VMA
(sympathetic neurons)
Brain (mainly);
MAO; COMT MHPG
PNS (less)
COMT Normetanephrine Little formed
Metanephrine
Epinephrine COMT Adrenal medulla
(mainly)
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter12.html 11/14

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Biogenic Amine Neurotransmitters (Section 1, Chapter 12, Part 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscience…
Serotonin MAO 5-HIAA Brain; PNS
Peripheral (mainly);
Histamine HMT; MAO TMI
brain (less)
DOPAC= dihydroxyphenylacetic acid
HVA=homovanillic acid
VMA=vanillymandelic
MHPG=3-methoxy,4-hydroxyphenylethylene glycol
5-HIAA=5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid
TMI = telemethylimadazole
12.27 Dopamine - Physiological and Behavioral Actions
Cross Reference: Links for DA is involved in a number of important physiological functions including motor control, coordinating
Dopamine
autonomic function, and regulating hormone release and motivation. The role of DA systems in motivated
Anatomy
Cell Biology behavior is of particular importance.
Physiology
Clinical DA appears to be involved in at least two phases of motivated behavior: an appetite phase and a
consumption phase. The ventral striatum, particularly the nucleus accumbens, has been shown to be
actively involved in appetitive aspects of motivation. For example, food deprived animals with lesions of
the nucleus accumbens fail to show an appetitive behavior when presented with food. The consumption of the food, in contrast, is
unimpaired by these lesions. On the other hand, the dorsal striatum, particularly the caudate-putamen, appears to be involved in
consummatory aspects of motivated behavior. Lesions in this region disrupt motivated behavior. Animals with lesions in this region
will approach food but will not consume it. These and other observations have led to the proposition that DA mediates a
performance activating effect of motivated behavior, as well as conveying internal reward signals. These characteristics of DA
neurotransmission make it an extremely important neurotransmitter in motivational behavior as well as in the neuropharmacology
of reward. Importantly, DA neurotransmission is hypothesized to be at the heart of the mechanisms of ALL addictive-drugs and
behaviors. A pertinent example of DA's role is illustrated by both cocaine and amphetamine, two abused drugs that act by
increasing the concentration of DA in the synaptic space.
12.28 Norepinephrine - Physiological and Behavioral Actions
Cross Reference: Links for NE, like DA, is involved in a broad range of physiological functions and behaviors. One of the most
Norepinephrine
important is its role in attention and arousal.
Anatomy
Cell Biology
Physiology NE neurons appear to be involved in the regulation of an organism's vigilance. The broad projection of the
Clinical locus coeruleus (LC) makes it especially well suited to act as a mechanism to alert cortical and thalamic
areas to incoming sensory stimuli. The LC is electrophysiologically quiet during low vigilance states such as
sleep or in the lack of sensory input. When exposed to a strong stimulus, the LC markedly increases its firing rate, however. The
broad influence of the activated LC is to filter weak stimuli and enhance moderate stimuli. This filtering and enhancement by NE is
believed to aid in CNS processing of sensory information. In support of this conclusion, the application of NE to cortical neurons
reduces responsiveness to weak stimuli, and enhances responses to strong stimuli. α receptors appear to be important for these
2
responses.
12.29 Serotonin - Physiological and Behavioral Actions
Cross Reference: Links for Serotonin Serotonin is a key neurotransmitter in a number of physiological regulatory mechanisms and behaviors,
Anatomy including appetite, sleep, and aggression.
Cell Biology
Physiology
Clinical Serotonin is important in the regulation of appetite, and appears to act in a pathway that monitors the
carbohydrate intake, acting as a negative regulator of the motivation to ingest carbohydrate. This response
appears to be mediated by 5-HT in the hypothalamus and has led to the use of serotonin uptake blockers, such as fenfluramine, as
obesity pills (Table VII).
Many clinical observations and animal behavioral studies support the conclusion that serotonin is an important factor in aggressive
behavior and the expression of dominance versus submissive behavior. For example the use of pharmacological agents to decrease
levels of 5-HT at synapses in animal studies consistently demonstrates that low 5-HT is associated with both increased
aggressiveness and decreased dominance. Similarly, the measurement of 5-HT metabolites in CSF and blood of patients or
experimental animals shows that low 5-HIAA predicts aggressiveness as well as risk taking and a lower social rank. This correlation
between decreased 5-HT activity and increased aggression was recently supported by the observation that 5-HT receptor knock-
1B
out mice have a marked increase in aggressive behavior.
12.30 Clinical Importance and Pharmacology
MA neurotransmitters are prominent participants in the etiology of many PNS and CNS disorders. Described below are several of
the more prominent examples. Some of the many neuropharmacological agents that are used to treat these disorders are
contained in Table VII.
12.31 Dopamine - Clinical Importance and Pharmacology
Cross Reference: Links for DA is implicated in psychiatric illnesses (especially schizophrenia) and disorders of movement control.
Dopamine
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter12.html 12/14

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Biogenic Amine Neurotransmitters (Section 1, Chapter 12, Part 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscience…
Anatomy Schizophrenia. The DA theory of schizophrenia is based on the observation that DA antagonists are
Cell Biology effective antipsychotic drugs. Their capacity to inhibit DA receptors correlates well with their
Physiology
Clinical antipsychotic efficacy. Currently, clinical studies are attempting to develop DA antagonists with specific DA
receptor subtype efficacy that will most effectively decrease the antipsychotic symptoms without
influencing other DA actions, such as movement control. As mentioned in the anatomy section, an
overactivity of the mesolimbic DA system appears especially prominent in schizophrenia.
Disorders of Movement Control. It is now well accepted that decreased DA in the substantia nigra and striatum is the critical
lesion in Parkinson's disease. Autopsy shows that nearly all DA is lost during the course of this disease, apparently due to the
degeneration of DA neurons. l-DOPA is used to treat this disease's symptoms because it can be converted to DA by AADC in the
cells in the vicinity of the degenerated nerve endings to replace the missing endogenous DA. Some preparations of l-DOPA include a
pherpheral AADC inhibitor so that more of the l-DOPA will be available for transport into the CNS. Conversion of l-DOPA into DA in
the blood prevents its transport into the CNS. Other drugs that are effective in treating Parkinson's symptoms are DA agonists, as
well as MAO and COMT inhibitors.
12.32 Norepinephrine - Clinical Importance and Pharmacology
Cross Reference: Links for Affective Disorders. NE is believed to be involved in the etiology of some unipolar and bipolar affective
Norepinephrine
disorders. This conclusion is based to a large degree on the observation that drugs that are effective in
Anatomy
Cell Biology treating depression are also good at either 1) preventing the metabolism of NE (MAO inhibitors), or 2)
Physiology preventing the the removal of NE from the extracellular space by uptake into nerve endings. There is also
Clinical evidence that the levels of the CNS NE metabolites are lower in depressed patients and higher during the
manic phase of bipolar disorder in manic patients.
Autonomic or Smooth Muscle Dysfunction. Drugs that interact with NE receptors are widely used to treat disorders involving
autonomic or smooth muscle dysfunction such as asthma, coronary heart disease, angina pectoris, ventricular
arrhythmias, migraine and hyperthyroidism. (See Table VI).
12.33 Serotonin - Clinical Importance and Pharmacology
Cross Reference: Links for Serotonin Affective Disorders. Low levels of 5-HT and metabolites are associated with depression and especially a
Anatomy type of depression that is more likely to lead to suicide. Several studies have shown reduced 5-HT in
Cell Biology
Physiology brains of suicide victims as well as a low 5HIAA in CSF of depressed patients who have high incidence of
Clinical suicide attempts. Recent studies indicate that this type of 5-HT influence may start early in life; low levels
of 5HIAA have been found in children and adolescents with disruptive behavioral disorders. Some of the
drugs that are effective antidepressant treatments are nonspecific with respect to their relative influence on NE versus 5-HT
disposition, thus it has been difficult to know for certain which monoamine is responsible for the treatment effects. More recently
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (termed SSRIs) have been introduced for the treatment of depression that are among
the more effective drugs available for this purpose.
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder. 5-HT dysfunction has been associated with obsessive compulsive disorder. Accordingly,
selective 5-HT uptake blockers are used as a therapy for this condition.
Aggression. Although controversial, 5-HT reuptake blockers are used for the treatment of aggression.
Eating Disorders. Also controversial is the use of the drug fenfluramine to treat eating disorders because of the toxic effects that
occur in some individuals. Fenfluramine blocks 5-HT reuptake into nerve terminals.
Schizophrenia. A number of recently introduced antipsychotic drugs are producing favorable results in treating the symptoms of
schizophrenia. These drugs are interesting pharmacologically in that they block both DA and 5-HT receptors as well as ACh and HA
(Table VII, Olanzapine).
Migraine Headaches. 5-HT agonists are used for the treatment of migraine headache.
1
Insomnia. The role of 5-HT in sleep regulation has lead to the hypothesis that reduced levels 5-HT may induce insomnia. Some
clinicians are treating patients with 5-HT uptake blockers for this ailment.
12.34 Histamine - Clinical Importance and Pharmacology
Cross Reference: Links for Insomnia. The most popular treatment for insomnia is the use of over the counter CNS acting
Histamine
antihistamines.
Anatomy
Cell Biology
Clinical See the Table of Drugs that Interact with Monoamines.
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter12.html 13/14

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Biogenic Amine Neurotransmitters (Section 1, Chapter 12, Part 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscience…
Which of the following can be administered orally to increase dopamine levels in the CNS? (NOTE:
There is more than one correct answer.)
A. Dopamine
B. Tyrosine
C. Acetyl coenzyme A
D. l-DOPA
E. l-DOPA plus an aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase inhibitor
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter12.html 14/14



1/7/25, 2:28 AM Acetylcholine Neurotransmission (Section 1, Chapter 11) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depa…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 1: Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology
Search
Chapter 11: Acetylcholine Neurotransmission
Jack C. Waymire, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
Revised 28 July 2020
11.1 Introduction
Acetylcholine, the first neurotransmitter discovered, was originally described as "vagus stuff" by Otto Loewi because of its ability to
mimic the electrical stimulation of the vagus nerve. It is now known to be a neurotransmitter at all autonomic ganglia, at many
autonomically innervated organs, at the neuromuscular junction, and at many synapses in the CNS.
In this chapter we will discuss the acetylcholine’s anatomy, cell biology, physiological effects, role in behavior, and clinical
applications.
c 2000 UTHSCH c 2000 UTH
Figure 11.1
Structure of acetylcholine (ACh)
11.2 Acetylcholine in the Autonomic Nervous System
In the autonomic nervous system, acetylcholine (ACh) is the neurotransmitter in the preganglionic sympathetic and
parasympathetic neurons. These are shown in Figure 11.2 as the red ACh in the ganglion. ACh is also the neurotransmitter at the
adrenal medulla and serves as the neurotransmitter at all the parasympathetic innervated organs. ACh is also the
neurotransmitter at the sweat glands, and at the piloerector muscle of the sympathetic ANS (Labeled in blue in Figure 11.2).
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter11.html 1/10

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Acetylcholine Neurotransmission (Section 1, Chapter 11) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depa…
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 11.2
Peripheral and autonomic sites where ACh is
neurotransmitter.
11.3 ACh in the Peripheral Nervous System
In the peripheral nervous system, ACh is the neurotransmitter at the neuromuscular junction between the motor nerve and
skeletal muscle.
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 11.3
Distribution of cholinergic cell groups and projections in
the rat brain.
11.4 ACh in the Central Nervous System
In the central nervous system, ACh is found primarily in interneurons, shown in Figure 11.3 as orange and green cell clusters. A few
important long-axon cholinergic pathways have also been identified. Noteworthy is the cholinergic projection from the nucleus
basalis of Meynert (in the basal forebrain) to the forebrain neocortex and associated limbic structures, represented by the black
pathway in Figure 11.3. Degeneration of this pathway is one of the pathologies associated with Alzheimer's disease. There is also
a projection from the medial septal and diagonal band region to limbic structures (blue). Most subcortical areas are innervated by
neurons from the ponto-mesencephalic region (purple in Figure 11.3).
11.5 Introduction to the Cell Biology of the Cholinergic Synapse
Figure 11.4 is a summary of the biological mechanisms involved in the synthesis, storage secretion, receptor interaction and
termination of acetylcholine. Click on the region of the cell describing these processes to learn more about each one.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter11.html 2/10

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Acetylcholine Neurotransmission (Section 1, Chapter 11) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depa…
Figure 11.4
Click on the blocks marked (above) to see details, or choose from the list below.
1. Synthesis of Acetylcholine
2. Storage of Acetylcholine
3. Release of Acetylcholine
4. Acetylcholine Receptors
a. Nicotinic
b. Muscarinic
5. Termination of Acetylcholine Action
11.6 Synthesis of ACh
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 11.5
Diagram showing the role of acetyl-CoA from glucose metabolism
and choline from the high affinity uptake in ACh biosynthesis.
Choline acetyltransferase (CAT): As shown in Figure 11.5, ACh is synthesized by a single step reaction catalyzed by the biosynthetic
enzyme choline acetyltransferase. As is the case for all nerve terminal proteins, CAT is produced in the cholinergic cell body and
transported down the axon to the nerve endings. Both CAT and ACh may be found throughout the neuron, but their highest
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter11.html 3/10

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Acetylcholine Neurotransmission (Section 1, Chapter 11) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depa…
concentration is in axon terminals. The presence of CAT is the "marker" that a neuron is cholinergic, only cholinergic neurons
contain CAT.
The rate-limiting steps in ACh synthesis are the availability of choline and acetyl-CoA. During increased neuronal activity the
availability of acetyl-CoA from the mitochondria is upregulated as is the uptake of choline into the nerve ending from the synaptic
cleft. Ca2+ appears to be involved in both of these regulatory mechanisms. As will be described later, the inactivation of ACh is
converted by metabolism to choline and acetic acid. Consequently much of the choline used for ACh synthesis comes from the
recycling of choline from metabolized ACh. Another source is the breakdown of the phospholipid, phosphatidylcholine. One of the
strategies to increase ACh neurotransmission is the administration of choline in the diet. However, this has not been effective,
probably because the administration of choline does not increase the availability of choline in the CNS.
11.7 Storage of ACh
The majority of the ACh in nerve endings is contained in clear (as viewed in the electron microscope) 100 um vesicles. A small
amount is also free in the cytosol. Vesicle-bound ACh is not accessible to degradation by acetylcholinesterase (see below).
The uptake of ACh into storage vesicle occurs through an energy-dependent pump that acidifies the vesicle. The acidified vesicle
then uses a vesicular ACh transporter (VAChT) to exchange protons for ACh molecules. No useful pharmacological agents are
available to modify cholinergic function through interaction with the storage of ACh.
Interestingly, the gene for VAChT is contained on the first intron of the choline acetyltransferase gene. This proximity implies the
two important cholinergic proteins are probably regulated coordinately.
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 11.6
ACh uptake by VAChT and storage in
neurotransmitter vesicles involves the exchange of
H+ for ACh.
11.8 Release of ACh
The release of ACh occurs through Ca2+ stimulated docking, fusion, and fission of the vesicle with the nerve terminal membrane, as
discussed previously.
You will recall that the miniature endplate potentials and the quantal release in response to action potentials at the
neuromuscular junction are due to the release of packets of ACh from individual storage vesicles (Chapter 5). Many toxins are
known that interfere with these processes and are effective in preventing ACh secretion. The examples in Figure 11.6 shows
botulinum toxin inhibition and black widow spider venom (BWSV) stimulation of ACh release.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter11.html 4/10

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Acetylcholine Neurotransmission (Section 1, Chapter 11) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depa…
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 11.7
Ca2+-dependent ACh secretion and two toxins that modify
secretion.
11.9 ACh Receptors
There are two broad classes of cholinergic receptors: nicotinic and muscarinic. This classification is based on two chemical agents
that mimic the effects of ACh at the receptor site nicotine and muscarine.
Table I summarizes some of the properties of nicotinic and muscarinic receptors.
Table I
Nicotinic and Muscarinic Receptors and their Actions
Nicotinic Muscarinic
Bind nicotine Bind muscarine
Blocked by curare (tubocurarine) Blocked by atropine
Linked to 2nd messenger systems through G proteins
Linked to ionic channels
(see below)
Response is brief and fast Response is slow and prolonged
Located at neuromuscular junctions, autonomic Found on myocardial muscle, certain smooth muscle,
ganglia, and to a small extent in the CNS and in discrete CNS regions
Mediate excitation in target cells Mediate inhibition and excitation in target cells
Postsynaptic Both pre- and postsynaptic
11.10 The Nicotinic Receptor is an Ion Channel
As indicated in Table I, nicotinic receptors are located at the NMJ,
autonomic ganglia and sparsely in the CNS.
The NMJ nicotinic ACh receptor consists of five polypeptide
subunits: two α subunits and one each of β, δ, and γ (see Figure
11.8). A funnel-shaped internal ion channel is surrounded by the
five subunits. The binding surface of the receptor appears to be
primarily on the α subunits, near the outer surface of the
molecule. The subunits contain recognition sites for agonists,
reversible antagonists, and α-toxins (cobra α-toxin and α-
bungarotoxin).
Whereas the NMJ nicotinic receptor is composed of four different
species of subunit (2 α, β, γ, δ), the neuronal nicotinic receptor
also is composed of only two subunit types (2 α and 3 β).
Figure 11.8
Schematic of the five subunit nicotinic ACh receptor in the
postsynaptic membrane at the NMJ. ACh binds to the two a
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter11.html 5/10

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Acetylcholine Neurotransmission (Section 1, Chapter 11) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depa…
subunits. The bottom half shows the molecular structure of
each a subunit of the nicotinic receptor based on cDNA derived
amino acid sequence. The β, γ and δ subunits have an
analogous structure to the α subunit.
11.11 The Muscarinic Receptor is Coupled
to G-Proteins
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 11.9
ACh released into the extracellular space interacts with muscarinic receptors on both the innervated cell and the ACh nerve
ending.
Muscarinic receptors, classified as G protein coupled receptors (GPCR), are located at parasympathetic autonomically
innervated visceral organs, on the sweat glands and piloerector muscles and both post-synaptically and pre-synaptically in the CNS
(see Table I). The muscarinic receptor is composed of a single polypeptide. Seven regions of the polypeptide are made up of 20-25
amino acids arranged in an α helix. Because each of these regions of the protein is markedly hydrophobic, they span the cell
membrane seven times as depicted in Figure 11.9. The fifth internal loop and the carboxyl-terminal tail of the polypeptide receptor
are believed to be the site of the interaction of the muscarinic receptor with G proteins (see right). The site of agonist binding is a
circular pocket formed by the upper portions of the seven membrane-spanning regions.
ACh has excitatory actions at the neuromuscular junction, at autonomic ganglion, at certain glandular tissues and in the CNS. It has
inhibitory actions at certain smooth muscles and at cardiac muscle.
The biochemical responses to stimulation of muscarinic receptor involve the receptor
NH c 2000 UTHSCH occupancy causing an altered conformation of an associated GTP-binding protein (G
2
protein). G protein is made up of the three subunits α, β and γ. In response to the
altered conformation of the muscarinic receptor, the a subunit of the G protein releases
bound guanosine diphosphate (GDP) and simultaneously binds guanosine
triphosphate (GTP). The binding of GTP "activates" the G protein, allowing dissociation
of the α subunit from the trimeric complex and for it to interact with effector systems to
mediate specific responses. An inherent GTPase catalytic activity of the G protein
hydrolyzes the GTP back to GDP. This hydrolysis terminates the action of the G protein.
GDP
The rate of hydrolysis of the GTP thus dictates the length of time the G protein remains
GTP COOH PLAY activated.
The responses mediated by muscarinic receptors through G proteins include:
Figure 11.10
Muscarinic receptors are seven Inhibition of Adenylate Cyclase: The muscarinic receptor, through interaction with an
transmembrane proteins that mediate inhibitory GTP-binding protein, acts to inhibit adenylyl cyclase. Reduced cAMP production
their signals through G proteins. leads to reduced activation of cAMP-dependent protein kinase, reduced heart rate,
and contraction strength.
Stimulation of Phospholipase C: The muscarinic receptor activates phosphoinositide-specific phospholipase C (PLCβ) through
interaction with a GTP-binding protein. As shown in Figure 11.12a, the hydrolysis of phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate yields
two second messengers; inositol trisphosphate (IP ) and diacylglycerol (DAG). The DAG activates protein kinase C (not
3
shown). Cellular responses are influenced by PKC's phosphorylation of target proteins. As shown in Figure 11.12b, the IP diffuses
3
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter11.html 6/10

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Acetylcholine Neurotransmission (Section 1, Chapter 11) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depa…
to the smooth endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) where it interacts with
IP receptors to increase Ca2+ release
3
from the intracellular storage site.
Activation of K+ Channels: In response
to muscarinic cholinergic receptor
stimulation, a GTP binding protein also GTP PLAY c 2000 UTHSCH
can interact directly with K+ channels to
increase K+ conductance, (Figure Figure 11.11
Activated G protein interacts with adenylyl cyclase to either activate or inhibit its activity.
11.13). This conductance increase
IP3 (Active) c 2000 UTHSCH
P
P
P P P
P P
PLC P
b PIP
P P
P P
P
q
P
P
GTP
PLAY c 2000 UTHSCH
Ca2+
PLAY
Figure 11.12a Figure 11.12b
G protein stimulation of PLCβ generates DAG and IP 3. The DAG Stimulation of IP
3
receptors by four molecules
stimulates PKC and IP 3 frees Ca2+ from smooth ER. stimulates the release of Ca2+ from the smooth ER.
increases the resting membrane potential in
myocardial and other cell membranes leading to
inhibition.
Figure 11.13
G protein directly increases K+ conductance by interacting with the K+ channels.
11.12 Termination of ACh
Action
ACh binds only briefly to the pre- or postsynaptic
receptors. Following dissociation from the receptor,
the ACh is rapidly hydrolyzed by the enzyme
acetylcholinesterase (AChE) as shown in Figure
11.14. This enzyme has a very high catalysis rate,
one of the highest known in biology. AChE is
synthesized in the neuronal cell body and
distributed throughout the neuron by axoplasmic
transport. AChE exists as alternatively spliced
isoforms that vary in their subunit composition. The
variation at the NMJ is a heteromeric protein
composed of four subunits coupled to a collagen tail
that anchors the multi-subunit enzyme to the cell
membrane of the postsynaptic cell (Figure 11.14).
This four-subunit form is held together by sulfhydryl
c 2000 UTHSCH
bonds and the tail anchors the enzyme in the
extracellular matrix at the NMJ. Other isoforms
are homomeric and freely soluble in the cytoplasm
of the presynaptic cell. AChE, unlike ChAT, is found
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter11.html 7/10

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Acetylcholine Neurotransmission (Section 1, Chapter 11) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depa…
in non-cholinergic neurons as well. In addition,
other cholinesterases exist throughout the body, Figure 11.14
which are also able to metabolize acetylcholine. Hydrolysis of ACh to acetate and choline at the NMJ and cholinergic synapses.
These are termed pseudocholinesterases.
Drugs that inhibit ACh breakdown are effective in altering cholinergic neurotransmission. In fact, the irreversible inhibition of AChE
by isopropylfluoroesters are so toxic that they can be incompatible with life—inhibiting the muscles for respiration. This inhibition
is produced because ACh molecules accumulate in the synaptic space, keep the receptors occupied, and cause paralysis. Two
notable examples are insecticides and the gases used in biological warfare. The mechanism of action of these irreversible
inhibitors of AChE is that they carbamylate the AChE, rendering it inactive. The carbamylation inactivates both the acetyl and
choline binding domains. A recently developed antidote to these inhibitors cleaves the nerve gas so that it will dissociate from the
AChE.
In contrast to the irreversible inhibitors, the reversible AChE inhibitors are effective in transiently increasing the ACh level and
are effective in diseases and conditions where an increased ACh level is desired. The clinically important compound, eserine
(physostigmine), reversibly inhibits AChE.
11.13 Physiology
Nicotinic receptor activation causes the opening of the channel formed by the receptor. This increases the Na+ movement into
the target cell, leading to depolarization and generation of the action potential. This rapidly developing change, termed a fast EPSP,
is illustrated in Figures 4.3, and 6.2.
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 11.15
Rapid depolarization of the cell by
nicotinic receptor activation.
Muscarinic receptor activation of postsynaptic cells can be either excitatory or inhibitory and is always slow in onset and long in
duration (Table I). Figure 11.16 and Figure 11.17 illustrate an excitatory and an inhibitory postsynaptic potential in the sympathetic
ganglion. As described earlier, G protein activation underlies all actions of the muscarinic receptors, thus accounting for their slow
onset.
c 2000 UTHSCH c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 11.16 Figure 11.17
Slow EPSP and IPSP form the sympathetic ganglion of the rat.
11.14 Behavior
The rapid nature of the synaptic transmission mediated by the nicotinic receptor is consistent with its role at the NMJ and in the
ganglion of the ANS. Little is known about the role of the nicotinic receptor role in CNS behavior. Clearly, nicotine stimulation is
related in some manner to reinforcement, as indicated by the prevalence of nicotine addiction among humans.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter11.html 8/10

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Acetylcholine Neurotransmission (Section 1, Chapter 11) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depa…
Muscarinic receptors, in contrast, are important mediators of behavior in the CNS. One example is their role in modulating motor
control circuits in the basal ganglia. A second example is their participation in learning and memory. The latter is inferred from two
types of observations: 1) muscarinic antagonists are amnesic agents, and 2) deterioration of the cholinergic innervation of the
neocortex is associated with memory loss in Alzheimer’s disease.
11.15 Clinical
Alzheimer's disease: A disease in which a marked deterioration occurs in the CNS, the hallmark of which is a progressive
dementia. One of the characteristics of this disease is a marked decrease in ACh concentrations in the cerebral cortex and caudate
nucleus.
Myasthenia gravis: A disease of the neuromuscular junction in which the receptors for ACh are destroyed through the actions of
the patient's own antibodies.
Cholinergic Pharmacology: Numerous drugs are used clinically to interact with the cholinergic systems. Table II summarizes the
major uses for cholinergic drugs.
11.16 Cholinergic Pharmacological Agents
Table II
Cholinergic Pharmacological Agents
Drug Action Clinical Use
Relaxes muscle in the eye causing the pupil to
dilate. Used when the eye is inflamed and during
eye examinations.
Slows the activity of the stomach and intestinal track
Atropine (and other Blocks muscarinic
and reduces acid secretion. Therefore, used for
anticholinergics) receptors
stomach cramps, diarrhea, diverticulitis,
pancreatitis, bed wetting, motion sickness.
There has been some indication of this drug for
Parkinson’s disease.
Blocks CNS muscarinic Used topically to prevent dizziness, nausea and
Scopolamine
receptors other aspects of motion sickness.
Blocks muscarinic Antidyskinetics used to treat Parkinson’s disease and
Amantadine (Symmetrel)
receptors the dyskinesia associated with antipsychotic drugs
Used to treat urinary retention, and stimulate
Bethanechol Mimics ACh
movement of intestinal tract.
Tacrine (Cognex) Blocks ACh breakdown Treat Alzheimer’s disease
Reduces pressure in the eye and is used to treat
glaucoma
Eserine or physostigmine Blocks ACh breakdown
Used to diagnose and treat myasthenia gravis
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
Which of the following is effective in increasing the level of acetylcholine in the synapse or
neuromuscular junction? (NOTE: There is more than one correct answer.)
A. Increasing dietary acetyl coenzyme A
B. Increasing the production of acetyl coenzyme A
C. Increasing dietary choline
D. Increasing choline uptake
E. Inhibition of the enzyme, acetylcholinesterase
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter11.html 9/10

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Acetylcholine Neurotransmission (Section 1, Chapter 11) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depa…
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter11.html 10/10



1/7/25, 2:28 AM Transport and the Molecular Mechanism of Secretion (Section 1, Chapter 10) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the N…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 1: Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology
Search
Chapter 10: Transport and the Molecular Mechanism of Secretion
Jack C. Waymire, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
Revised 30 July 2020
10.1 Introduction
As you learned in previous chapters, neurotransmission occurs through the secretion of neurotransmitter from a nerve ending to
influence the postsynaptic cell. In this chapter the biological mechanisms of vesicle mediated synaptic transmission will be
presented.
Within the last twenty years it has become apparent that all intracellular membrane trafficking is based on the same fundamental
mechanisms. The same operations involved in the synthesis and transport of vesicles at the ER and Golgi apparatus in the soma are
employed in a modified fashion during neurosecretion. The major difference is that vesicle trafficking during neurosecretion is
regulated by Ca2+ influx whereas vesicle trafficking during the synthesis and transport of vesicles is not. Unregulated trafficking is
termed constitutive. In both cases, however, trafficking is made up of a series of steps involving budding of vesicles, their docking
with other organelles, and fusion with the membranes of these organelles. These processes are believed to be present during
vesicle biogenesis when the ER generates vesicles that fuse with the Golgi apparatus, when the endosomes are trafficked to the
lysosomes, and when vesicle membrane is recaptured from the nerve ending plasma membrane. There is a budding from their
membrane origin, a movement to the destination point, and finally the docking of the vesicles with the target organelle where it
attaches to and fuses with the organelle membrane.
This section will cover the life of a neurotransmitter vesicle beginning with its synthesis in the cell soma, transport to the nerve
ending, recycling at the nerve ending. Vesicle proteins are eventually returned to the cell soma for reuse in the synthesis of new
vesicles.
Figure 10.1
Five phases of neurotransmitter trafficking that will be discussed.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter10.html 1/7

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Transport and the Molecular Mechanism of Secretion (Section 1, Chapter 10) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the N…
Click on the blocks marked on this Neuron (above) to see details, or choose from the list below.
1. Synthesis of Vesicles and Proteins
2. Anterograde Transport of Vesicles
3. Secretory Mechanism
4. Vesicle Recapture
5. Retrograde Axoplasmic Transport
10.2 Synthesis of Vesicles and Proteins
Figure 10.2
Diagrammatic representation of the
organelles involved in vesicle. To view the
processes involved in the biosynthesis of
vesicular proteins, click on one of the
structures.
The cycle of neurotransmitter vesicles begins in the ER where the proteins that make up the vesicles are synthesized. Vesicle
biosynthesis continues as the proteins migrate through the smooth ER and the Golgi apparatus to eventually emerge to be
transported to the nerve ending. The outer layer of the nuclear envelope is contiguous with the endoplasmic reticulum, which
is in turn contiguous with the Golgi apparatus.
10.3 Perinuclear Cisternae and Ribosomal Protein Synthesis
Figure 10.3
Diagrammatic representation of the sites of cellular protein
synthesis. Click (B) for an animation of cytoplasmic protein
synthesis. Click (C) for an animation of integral membrane
protein synthesis.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter10.html 2/7

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Transport and the Molecular Mechanism of Secretion (Section 1, Chapter 10) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the N…
As shown in Figure 10.3, after the mRNA is transcribed from the DNA in the nucleus, it migrates through pores in the nuclear
envelope called the perinuclear cisternae (label (A) in Figure 10.3). As the mRNA reaches the cytoplasm it encounters free
ribosomes, labeled (B). This is the site of cytoplasmic protein synthesis. Here, triplet nucleotide combinations, called codons,
translate the mRNA into protein through a mechanism where ribosomes read off the protein sequence encoded in the mRNA. As
ribosomes move along the mRNA template amino acids are added and the protein synthesized. Because most mRNA molecules
are longer than a ribosome, many ribosomes can read the codons of a single molecule of RNA.
Click "B" in the graphic at right for animation of cytoplasmic protein synthesis.
Proteins that are destined to be associated with membrane structures, such as neurotransmitter vesicles or the plasmalemma,
are synthesized on ribosomes within the endoplasmic reticulum. Recall that the presence of ribosomes defines this part of the
endoplasmic reticulum as rough endoplasmic reticulum.
In (C) of Figure 10.3, the polypeptide (protein) being synthesized has no signal peptide. Consequently, this protein will become a
non-membrane bound (soluble) protein that resides within lumen of vesicles. While in the lumen, the protein undergoes further
processing as it proceeds through the smooth ER, Golgi apparatus, and the secretory vesicle as mature secretory proteins are
formed.
In (D) of Figure 10.3, a signal peptide is a
part of the polypeptide being synthesized c 2000 UTHSCH
(this is signified in the figure by the fact that
the peptide is anchored in the ribosomal
membrane). Consequently, this protein will
be an integral membrane protein. As the
ribosome moves along the mRNA template,
amino acids are added. The signal peptide
inserts in the membrane of the endoplasmic
reticulum and maintains the protein's
association with membrane. This will ensure
that the protein will associate with a
vesicular structure, such as a
neurotransmitter storage vesicle. Shows the
protein synthesis from ribosomes in the
rough ER to synthesize membrane bound
protein.
10.4 Rough Endoplasmic Figure 10.4
Reticulum Diagram of the budding of vesicle from the SER and fusion with the Golgi Apparatus.
Figures 10.4 illustrates the movement of the secretory vesicles through the rough and the smooth ER. The smooth ER extends from
the RER and serves as a site for lipid biosynthesis for the production of endosomes, lysosomes and plasma membrane as
well as for the neurotransmitter vesicles. New membrane protein that begins its synthesis in the RER continues in the SER where
pieces of the SER bud off to form transport vesicles that shuttle to the Golgi apparatus with their contents.
10.5 Golgi
As shown in Figure 10.5, in the Golgi apparatus the vesicles fuse to form the
c 2000 UTHSCH
outermost of the Golgi apparatus cisternae stacks. Each cisterna migrates in a
stepwise fashion through the Golgi apparatus toward the concave surface. During
this migration, proteins become more concentrated and undergo various types of
biochemical modification to produce mature functional proteins. These modifications
include phosphorylation, glycosylation, proteolysis and addition of fatty acids, as
well as others. The migration proceeds from the cis face close to the SER to the
concave trans face. Upon reaching the concave face the cisternae round up into
small vacuoles, then coalesce to form a larger condensing vacuole. The condensing
vacuoles then give rise to a number of dense spherical transport vesicles. These
vesicles bud off and are transported to the various destinations within the neuron
where they become cell membrane, lysosomes, endosomes or neurotransmitter
vesicles.
10.6 Anterograde Transport of Vesicles
Vesicles formed in the cell soma are moved to the site at which they will be used in
synaptic transmission. This step in the trafficking of the vesicle is mediated by a
process termed fast anterograde axoplasmic transport. As depicted in Figure 10.6,
transport is mediated through the interaction of the vesicle with the microtubule.
Transport is an energy dependent process in which a so-called motor protein, kinesin,
associates with vesicles and moves down the microtubule in a series of attachment-
Figure 10.5 detachment steps. Evidence for the existence of axoplasmic transport comes from a
Diagram of the budding of vesicle from variety of observations, including the movement of radioactive proteins synthesized in
the Golgi Apparatus. the cell soma down the axon to the nerve endings. The speed of transport is 0.5-1.5
cm per hour. Ca2+ is also required for transport. The vinca alkaloid drugs colchicine
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter10.html 3/7

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Transport and the Molecular Mechanism of Secretion (Section 1, Chapter 10) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the N…
and vinblastine prevent axoplasmic
transport through their disruption of
microtubules.
10.7 Secretory Mechanism
As discussed in Chapter 5, neurotransmitter
is secreted at the nerve ending through the
Ca2+-dependent fusion of neurotransmitter
storage vesicle with the plasma membrane
with the neurotransmitter being secreted
(released) into the synaptic cleft to
c 2000 UTHSCH
influence the postsynaptic cell. This process
is termed exocytosis. An important concept
to emerge is that the same mechanisms Figure 10.6
that occur in vesicle fusion with membranes Anterograde axoplasmic transport mediated by kinesin association with microtubules.
in the Golgi during vesicle biosynthesis are
also employed at the nerve ending for
neurotransmitter release. This is true for vesicle synthesis. Even very simple cells like yeast. This conservation of mechanisms has
permitted the use of simple systems to help understand the molecular mechanisms of neurotransmitter release.
As shown in Figure 10.7, the first event that must occur (with the exception of
neuropeptide neurotransmitters) is the filling of vesicles with neurotransmitter
through specific neurotransmitter uptake (NT Uptake). This uptake will be
covered in subsequent chapters that discuss each of the specific
neurotransmitters.
The vesicles remain in reserve until needed for secretion. When needed for
secretion, a translocation occurs, which is also referred to as mobilization. The
vesicles move to a region of plasma membrane called the active zone. The
active zone is the release site and is characterized by the appearance of dense
material adjacent to the plasma membrane. The influx of Ca2+ is believed to
increase translocation by increasing the Ca2+ dependent phosphorylation of a
vesicle binding protein termed synapsin. The theory is that Ca2+ dependent
phosphorylation of synapsin frees the vesicles from binding to actin
microfilaments. The vesicles then bind to the active zone of the plasma PLAY
c 2000 UTHSCH
membrane, where they are in position to undergo release of their
neurotransmitter.
Figure 10.7
The association of the vesicle with the plasma membrane is termed docking and Steps in the secretion of neurotransmitter
serves to prime the vesicle for secretion. The docking is believed to occur through
the binding of proteins in the vesicle membrane to proteins in the plasma
membrane. Several of these proteins have been discovered because they are targets for clostridia bacterial toxins that block
synaptic transanimation. Several of these toxins and the proteins they detect are shown in Table I. The toxins are so toxic that a
single molecule can poison a whole nerve terminal. One of the synaptic vesicle proteins is VAMP, and two of the synaptic plasmal
membrane proteins are syntaxin and SNAP-25.
Table I
Toxin Synaptic Protein Location
Botulinum toxins A & E SNAP-25 Synaptic plasma membrane
Botulinum toxin C1 Syntaxins Synaptic plasma membrane
Botulinum toxin B, D, F & G &
VAMPs Synaptic vesicle
tetanus toxin
A third plasma membrane protein, n-sec-1, is important because its loose association with the plasma membrane prevents the
binding of the neurotransmitter vesicle proteins until n-sec-1 is displaced (the mechanism of n-sec-1 displacement is currently not
understood). This and subsequent steps in the secretory process are shown in Figure 10.8. The vesicle and plasma membrane
proteins are hypothesized to complex with one another upon the displacement of n-sec-1 to form a "trimeric complex" (SNAP-25,
syntaxin and VAMP). This three-member complex has been isolated, intact, from the nerve endings of animals. This association of
the proteins initiates fusion. Vesicles at this stage are primed for release.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter10.html 4/7

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Transport and the Molecular Mechanism of Secretion (Section 1, Chapter 10) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the N…
C C
Synaptotagmin N N Synaptotagmin
C C
VAMP VAMP
N N
PLAY
SNAP-25 SNAP-25
nsec 1 Syntaxin nsec 1
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 10.8
Diagrammatic representation of the interaction of vesicle and
membrane proteins during synaptic vesicle docking, fusion and
fission.
The final stage of release, also shown in Figure 10.8, is the fission of the membrane at the point of contact between the vesicle
and the plasma membrane. Exocytosis of neurotransmitter into the synaptic cleft occurs when this fission takes place. This step is
Ca2+ stimulated, but the mechanism of the Ca2+ trigger is unknown. One hypothesis is that a vesicle protein called
synaptotagmin binds Ca2+ to initiate fission. Support for synaptotagmin, as the Ca2+ sensor, is that it possesses two binding sites
for Ca2+. Additional evidence comes from studies of mice in which synaptotagmin has been knocked out. In these mice fast Ca2+-
triggered synaptic vesicle exocytosis is severely limited. Many aspects of the fusion-fission mechanism remain to be understood,
including: what causes the dissociation of n-sec-1 from the complex, how Ca2+ functions in the release process and how all the
proteins that are involved in release become reassociated with the proper membrane following release as the vesicle membrane is
recycled.
10.8 Vesicle Recapture
Although the source of vesicles for neurotransmitter secretion comes from biosynthesis in the Golgi apparatus at the cell body,
evidence indicates that local re-synthesis of synaptic vesicle is an important aspect of neurotransmitter secretion. Figures 10.9 and
10.10 provides two schematic summaries of how vesicles are locally reused. Both utilize the recapture of vesicle membrane from
the nerve ending. In one, vesicles bud off the plasma membrane through the formation of pits that migrate directly to become a
neurotransmitter vesicle as soon as it can be refilled with neurotransmitter through the neurotransmitter uptake process. This is
shown in Figure 10.9. This mechanism is referred to as the "kiss and run" hypothesis. The second mechanism involves the
formation of clathrin coated pits to recapture vesicle membrane, and the vesicles cycle through the endosomal compartment in
the nerve ending before becoming functional synaptic vesicles. The vesicles then bud off the endosome to form the
neurotransmitter vesicle. This is shown in Figure 10.10. It is believed that both mechanisms can exist in the same nerve ending or
only one of the two can be present. Both are important in that they recover vesicle protein to permit a plentiful supply for synaptic
transmission. This mechanism also prevents the enlargement of the nerve ending that would occur if vesicle membrane were not
recaptured. No matter which mechanism is involved, the supply and resupply of vesicles can only keep pace with a high rate of
synaptic transmission for a few minutes.
Direct Recycling - (Does not involve endosome Indirect Recycling - (Does involve endosome)
or clathrin coat)
PLAY PLAY
c 2000 UTHSCH c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 10.9 Figure 10.10
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter10.html 5/7

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Transport and the Molecular Mechanism of Secretion (Section 1, Chapter 10) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the N…
Representation of two mechanisms proposed to recapture vesicle membrane during neurotransmitter secretion.
10.9 Retrograde Axoplasmic Transport
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 10.11
Retrograde axoplasmic transport
mediated by dynein association
with microtubules.
Eventually the proteins utilized for synaptic transmission in the nerve ending are targeted and returned to the cell body of the
neuron to be recycled to make new protein and vesicles. The proteins are returned to the soma through a retrograde axoplasmic
transport that is analogous to anterograde transport but uses a different motor protein, dynein. Transport is mediated by the
interaction of dynein with microtubules and proceeds at a rate somewhat slower than that of fast anterograde transport (0.2-1
cm per day). In addition to returning proteins to the soma, retrograde transport serves as a means of communication between the
nerve endings and the cell soma. This is a mechanism to transport signaling molecules to regulate the development and
maintenance of axonal contacts with postsynaptic cells.
PLAY
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 10.12
Figure 10.12 shows a summary of retrograde and anterograde axoplasmic transport. It shows the motor proteins, kinesin and
dynein, mediating the movement of vesicles and mitochondria anterogradely and vesicles retrogradely along microtubules. The
animation shows the motor proteins as a part of the organelle that is transported. The other possible relationship between the
motor protein and microtubules is that the motor proteins are a part of the microtubule and pass the vesicles along the
microtubule.
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter10.html 6/7

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Transport and the Molecular Mechanism of Secretion (Section 1, Chapter 10) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the N…
Which of the following processes dictate the amount of neurotransmitter released from a nerve
ending on a short-term, minute-to-minute, basis? (NOTE: there is more than one correct answer.)
A. Neurotransmitter synthesis
B. Vesicle synthesis in the cell soma
C. Vesicle recycling in the nerve ending
D. Axoplasmic transport
E. Calcium availability
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter10.html 7/7



1/7/25, 2:28 AM Synapse Formation, Survival, and Elimination (Section 1, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscie…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 1: Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology
Search
Chapter 9: Synapse Formation, Survival, and Elimination
Andrew Bean, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
Revised 10 September 2024
9.1 Introduction
Perhaps the most remarkable feature of the nervous system is the accuracy of its synaptic connections. The networks of circuits
formed by neuronal interactions are responsible for the generation of behavior. Synapse formation is finely regulated. It involves
processes at the cellular and subcellular levels, which result in: axons finding their appropriate targets from an array of choices;
synapses being formed on the correct cellular compartment; and formation of pre- and postsynaptic specializations that allow for
efficient information transfer.
We will discuss the following topics:
1. Axon Pathfinding – how axons find their way to specific targets.
a. guidance forces – forces that are produced by guidance molecules.
b. guidance molecules – proteins that help with axonal guidance.
2. Target recognition – how do axons "know" they have found the correct target?
One general property of neurons is that they migrate from the sites at which they begin to differentiate to their final residence in
the nervous system.
Some neurons migrate to these final positions before they extend processes (e.g., motor neurons).
Other neurons extend axons as they migrate (e.g., cerebellar granule neurons).
Granule cells in the developing cerebellum migrate long distances along
the processes of radial glial cells; this migration begins in the external External Granule
granule layer and ends at the granule cell layer. For example, epithelial Cell Layer
cells at the luminal surface of the neural tube proliferate to give rise to
neuroblasts; some neuroblasts become radial glial cells and extend
their processes from the luminal to pial surface. During the
development of the cerebellum, granule neurons migrate through the Cerebellar PLAY
molecular layer along the processes of radial glial cells. A number of Molecular Layer
neurological mutants have provided invaluable information about
neuronal migration. For example, in the "weaver" mutant mouse the
genetic defect is in granule neurons and not radial glia. In weaver, the Purkinje Cell
Layer
granule cells are not able to migrate to their normal position below the
Granule Cell
Purkinje cell layer. This defect results in abnormal synaptic circuitry and Layer
impaired motor behavior. Once neurons have migrated to their final
position, and sometimes before, they begin to extend axons. Neurons Radial Glial Cell
extend axons because of a specialized structure at the end of axons
c 2000 UTHSCH
called growth cones. Granule cells in the developing cerebellum migrate
long distances along the processes of radial glial cells. This migration
Figure 9.1
begins in the external granule layer and ends at the granule cell layer.
9.2 Axon Pathfinding
Neurons differentiate from multipotent stem cells and migrate to their final residence in the nervous system. When these neurons
reach their residence, they extend an axon and dendrites to send and receive (respectively) information from other neurons. In
general, dendrites remain relatively close to the cell body of the neuron, whereas axons may travel long distances to enable
interneuronal communication.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter09.html 1/17

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Synapse Formation, Survival, and Elimination (Section 1, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscie…
Since axons may travel long distances and must search out their target from among many
possibilities, the growing end of the axon, or growth cone, must have a mechanism to sense its
surroundings.
PLAY
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 9.2
A developing neuron extends
multiple dendrites and a single
axon.
Figure 9.3
A single axon grows from a cell with a
growth cone at its tip (center box) and
eventually forms a synapse with a target
cell. Click on the left box to see an
enlarged image corresponding to axonal
outgrowth, The center box to see an axon
being influenced by its environment
during pathfinding, and the right box for
axon-target interactions resulting in
synapse formation.
The distal tip of a growing axon is called the growth cone. Actin is highly concentrated in both the lamellipodia and the finger-
like extensions (filopodia). Although the direction of growth cone movement is influenced by the extracellular environment, the
growth cone itself possesses intrinsic mechanisms that enable forward movement. Actin is polymerized at the leading edge of the
growth cone and moved towards the rear where is it depolymerized. This continuous cycling movement of polymerized actin away
from the leading edge towards the rear and the movement of actin monomer to the leading edge again generates a "tank-tread"
type of movement. If this actin-based movement is linked to the substrate on which the growth cone is moving, the "tank-tread"
movement is endowed with traction and growth cone movement ensues.
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 9.4
Anatomy of a growth cone.
Ramón y Cajal first described growth cones and observed that they move in a circuitous route towards their targets. This
observation suggested that the growth cones play an active role in the pathfinding process. Roger Sperry later showed that after
lesions of the optic nerve in the frog, retinotectal axons regenerate, find their targets, and make synaptic connections with
precision. Based on these observations, Sperry suggested the existence of surface markers that are used by the growth cones for
pathway and target recognition. Later studies in grasshopper embryo, Drosophila, chick, and zebrafish showed that growth cones
follow specific pathways in a variety of species. Since axon pathfinding is similar in disparate species, the mechanisms underlying
axon guidance are likely conserved. Understanding the cellular and molecular mechanisms that determine the guidance of growing
axons is important because it underlies the initial wiring of the nervous system, but also because it is necessary if there is to be
regeneration of function after injury.
9.3 Sources of Guidance Information
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter09.html 2/17

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Synapse Formation, Survival, and Elimination (Section 1, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscie…
Axonal growth cones serve to sense environmental cues and direct the movement of
axons in their quest to make synapses with their targets. Guidance cues are
necessary to control the growth of axons for long distances to precise destinations.
The molecular mechanisms by which these cues act probably involve altering the
rate or location of actin polymerization by acting on receptors on the growth cone
surface, that are linked to intracellular signaling cascades.
9.4 Guidepost cells
c 2000 UTHSCH
Axonal trajectories appear to be broken up into a series of smaller movements. The
Figure 9.5
axon finds intermediate targets that act as choice points. Axons slow and transform
Guidepost cells act as intermediate targets to
their morphology at these points, and apparently look for another round of
help guide growth cones to their final
directions. Pioneering growth cones (the growth cones on initial axons that are
targets.
later joined by other axons to create a large axon bundle) are thought to be
influenced by these intermediate targets (called guidepost cells in insects). The
pioneering growth cones are also influenced by other cues such that the intermediate targets exert only one of a number of
influences on the path of growing axons.
9.5 Fasciculation
The bundling together of axons into tracts is called fasciculation. Axonal
fasciculation is also a guidance cue as segments of some axonal
trajectories migrate along preexisting axon tracts. Thus, axons may follow
the pathways laid down by the pioneering axons, although there is some
selectivity. An axon may pass a number of axon tracts and make specific
choices about which of these axon tracts to follow. It is not yet clear
whether the pioneer cells are absolutely required for pathfinding in follower
cells. If pioneer cells are not present, the follower cells are more prone to PLAY
make pathfinding errors, although these errors are largely corrected and
the axons find their targets.
c 2000 UTHSCH
9.6 Guidance Forces
Figure 9.6
Axon fasciculation. The pioneer axon (blue) serves as
1. Local vs. long range
a scaffold for the outgrowth of the new axon from
2. Attraction vs. repulsion
another cell (purple).
3. Target derived signals
Guidepost cells and preexisting axons can affect the outgrowth of
developing axons. In addition to these influences, axons also receive long-range guidance information. This short- or long-range
guidance information can be attractive or repulsive and serves to push or pull the growth cone in the correct direction towards its
target.
Short-range guidance mechanisms, like the interaction with guidepost cells and fasciculation, involve contact-mediated detection by
the growth cone filopodia. This contact may be attractive or repulsive. Long- range, diffusable factors may also influence axonal
guidance by both attraction and repulsion. It is likely that axons are affected by both local and long-range forces acting
simultaneously.
c 2000 UTHSCH
PLAY
PLAY
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 9.7 Figure 9.8
Attractive forces produced by Repulsive signals, in the form of
diffusable factors, serve to direct concentration gradients of soluble
axons to their appropriate targets. proteins, help to direct axons away
from incorrect destinations.
9.7 Target Recognition-Topographic Maps
Axonal projections are often topographically organized, such that neighboring neurons in the region of origin project to neighboring
neurons in the target region (e.g., retinal ganglion cells project topographically onto neurons in the superior colliculus). This
organization presents further complexity to the rules of axon outgrowth and raises the question of how the topographic information
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter09.html 3/17

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Synapse Formation, Survival, and Elimination (Section 1, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscie…
is encoded. The original experiments of Roger Sperry and later work by many other laboratories has led to the notion that positional
information is found at the level of the target region. What is this positional information? One possibility is that each axon has a
label that corresponds to an identical label on its appropriate target, allowing specificity of connections. This seems unpractical;
there would need to be a very large number of labels, and there is no clear targeting mechanism for the axons. A more likely option
was suggested by Sperry in his Chemoaffinity Hypothesis that suggests that positional information is encoded in the form of
gradients of signaling molecules at the target which would be detected by complementary gradients of receptors on the axons. This
model implies that positional information can be encoded by a small number of molecules and that this information can be "read"
by axons as they maneuver in the target region. This chemotropic guidance of axons by diffusable factors that are secreted by cells
can involve attractive or repulsive forces.
9.8 Molecules Involved in Axon Growth
Short- and long-range cues act to guide axon growth. These guidance effects can be attractive or repulsive. Axons may use several,
or all, of these forces for navigation of single segments of movement. For example, a repellent from behind will "push" an axon into
a corridor marked by permissive local cues and bounded by repulsive factors, while an attractant at the end of the corridor may
"pull" the axon toward its target. After it was clear that these types of forces work to direct axon growth, attention turned to
identifying the molecules that mediate these guidance effects.
9.9 Cell Adhesion Molecules and Extracellular Matrix Molecules
In the past ten years, some of the molecules on the surface of neurons and the substrates on which they grow have been identified.
Many of the molecules are responsible for general adhesive interactions between a growth cone and its environment, and others
help in choosing which surfaces axons grow on.
Many of the molecules involved in adhesion are glycoproteins and belong to three major families of proteins:
1. The immunoglobulin (Ig) superfamily; one major member of this family is the neuronal cell adhesion molecules or N-
CAMs (their adhesion properties are Ca2+-independent). There are at least 50 CAMs in mammals.
N-CAMs (neuronal cell adhesion molecules): N-CAMs were first discovered because of their roles in the development of
retinal neurons. Each N-CAM binds to another N-CAM, which is called homophilic binding.
2. The cadherins (their adhesion properties are Ca2+-dependent)
CADHERINS: There are many cadherins, the major type found in brain, [N-cadherin], is present on most neurons and is
expressed very early in development. Adhesion between individual cadherins is by homophilic binding and is Ca2+-
dependent. Most neurons express both N-CAMs and N-cadherin.
3. The integrins; they mediate interactions between the cell-surface and the extracellular matrix (ECM)
INTEGRINS: Integrins are transmembrane proteins involved in adhesion between cell-surfaces and components of the
ECM; the adhesive interactions between integrins and other macromolecules is by heterophilic binding. The
expression of different combinations of integrins on different cells determines which ECM molecules they bind.
Components of the ECM that bind integrins include:
Fibronectin (secreted by fibroblasts and found in the peripheral nervous system [PNS])
Laminin (comprises the basement membrane of non-neuronal cells and the basal lamina of cells in the PNS; there appears to
be a family of laminins)
Local guidance cues are provided by cell surface proteins that act on the growing axon as it follows its path towards its eventual
target.
The homophilic interaction of the CAMs has suggested a role in mediating axon fasciculation and adhesion of axons to cells and/or
axon pathways.
c2000 UTHSCH c2000 UTHSCH c2000 UTHSCH
Figure 9.9 Figure 9.10 Figure 9.11
(enlarged) (enlarged) (enlarged)
c2000 UTHSCH
c2000 UTHSCH
Figure 9.12 Figure 9.13
(enlarged) (enlarged)
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter09.html 4/17

Other Short Range Cues:
The ventral midline of the nervous systems acts as an important intermediate target for axons. Growth cones are able to sense
specific cues at the midline that influence their decision to cross or not to cross. In addition to being a source of attractants and
repellents, the ventral midline is also able to alter an axon's ability to respond to these cues. For example, after crossing the floor
plate, axons that were responsive to the chemoattractant Netrin 1 prior to crossing are, after crossing, no longer able to respond to
this cue.
The growth of single sensory axons in an in vitro system led to the identification of an activity in extracts of embryonic spinal cord
and of postnatal and adult brain, that promotes the elongation and formation of extensive branches by these axons. Biochemical
purification of the activity led to the identification of an amino-terminal fragment of Slit2 as the main active component. Thus, Slit
proteins may function as positive regulators of axon collateral formation during the establishment or remodeling of neural circuits.
The receptor for slit is present on axonal growth cones and has been identified as the Roundabout (Robo) protein.
Slit gradient
Robo
PLAY
(Midline)
HCSHTU
0002
c
1/7/25, 2:28 AM Synapse Formation, Survival, and Elimination (Section 1, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscie…
Figure 9.14
The midline can control growth cone
properties. The Roundabout (Robo)
receptor is downregulated on
crossing axons at the midline. After
crossing the midline, Robo is again
specifically upregulated, thus
ensuring that these axons do not
recross again.
9.10 Additional Molecules Involved in Axon Guidance
Receptor tyrosine kinases, extracellular matrix molecules, and netrins, semaphorins and their receptors are also involved in axon
guidance. The functions of each are explained below.
9.11 Receptor Tyrosine Kinases
Receptor tyrosine kinases can function to modulate or guide axon growth. In general these receptors are found on developing
axons and allow the axon to respond to various growth factors in the local environment. For example, one type of fibroblast growth
factor receptor (FGFr, a tyrosine kinase) is necessary for FGF or N-CAM-induced neurite outgrowth. The neurotrophins, NGF, BDNF,
NT-3, and NT-4/5, are usually thought of as survival factors for neurons, although these growth factors can also promote axon
outgrowth, allow axons to invade their target regions, and promote axon terminal arborization.
9.12 Extracellular Matrix Molecules
Extracellular matrix (ECM) molecules can act to promote or inhibit neurite outgrowth. Laminin, tenascin, collagen, fibronectin,
and a number of proteoglycans have been suggested to modulate axonal outgrowth. For example, laminin can promote, while
tenascin can inhibit neurite extension. Receptors for ECM molecules include the integrins as well as Ig family members.
The laminin family and its receptors are one of the best studied examples of ECM molecules with regard to neuronal development.
There are at least ten different isoforms of laminins that have growth promoting or inhibiting effects on different cell types. The
axonal receptors for laminins are integrins. Integrins are heterodimers whose subunit composition determines binding specificity
with respect to the laminins. The integrins link ECM signals to the cytoskeleton and various signal transduction pathways. The role
of laminins and other ECM molecules in neuronal development is to affect axonal guidance.
9.13 Netrins, Semaphorins and Their Receptors
The netrins are a family of secreted proteins related to laminins in sequence They are both diffusable and cell associated. The
netrins were identified using two approaches. A genetic assay in nematode uncovered a mutant gene that resulted in defects in cell
migration and axon guidance and an in vitro assay using chick floor plate cell extracts identified a factor that results in outgrowth
and guidance of spinal cord axons. Netrins are well conserved from nematode to human and are encoded by only one or two genes
in most species. Netrin binds to two types of axonal receptors (DCC/UNC-40 and UNC-5) that determine whether the actions of
netrin are attractive or repulsive.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter09.html 5/17

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Synapse Formation, Survival, and Elimination (Section 1, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscie…
c 2000 UTHSCH
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 9.16
Attraction or repulsion from a semaphorin
III gradient in the ventral spinal cord.
Figure 9.15
Axons of primary afferents are directed to Axons are either attracted or repulsed
termination zones in spinal laminae with from a netrin gradient in the developing
the help of a semaphorin III gradient that floor plate depending on the type of netrin
attracts NT-3 responsive axons (blue) while receptors they possess. Those axons that
repelling NGF responsive axons (green), have DCC/UNC40 receptors will be
and having no effect on some axons (red) attracted to netrin, while those that
that apparently receive their directional possess UNC5 receptors will be repulsed.
cues from other sources. The mechanisms by which these receptors
evoke differential responses remains to be
discovered.
The semaphorins are a large family of cell surface or secreted proteins that mediate
growth cone collapse, axonal steering, axonal branching, and axon terminal
arborization. At least ten semaphorins are found in humans and they appear to function predominantly as inhibitory (repulsive)
factors for axonal guidance. Neuropilins serve as receptors for secreted semaphorins, whereas members of the plexin family are
receptors for other semaphorins. Secreted semaphorins do not bind directly to plexins, but plexins can associate with neuropilins.
Thus, plexins are receptors for multiple classes of semaphorins, either alone or in combination with neuropilins, and trigger a signal
transduction pathway controlling axon guidance.
Summary of Molecules Involved in Axon Outgrowth and Guidance
Ligand Receptor Ligand Receptor
Contact Attraction Contact Repulsion
Ig CAM Ig CAM
Fasciclin II Fasciclin II
NrCAM Axonin-1 Eph Ligand Eph Receptor
ECM Integrin Semaphorin I Plexins
Laminin Integrin Slit Robo
Chemoattraction Chemorepulsion
Netrins (UNC-6) DCC (UNC-40, Frazzled) Netrins (UNC-6) UNC-5
Semaphorins
plexins + neuropilins
(secreted)
Summary
The growth of developing axons depends on:
1. Physical guidance cues such as guidepost cells and pioneer axons.
2. Local and long-range molecules involved in attraction and repulsion of developing axons (the presence of which substantiates
the chemoaffinity hypothesis of Sperry).
3. The presence of receptors on developing axons that allow for modulation of growth by environmental factors.
The establishment of synaptic connections and their maintenance depends the interactions of axons and their targets. These
interactions are responsible for synapse stabilization and neuron survival. Synaptic transmission depends on the association of the
pre- and post-synaptic elements. The pre- and postsynaptic regions of cells are highly specialized architecturally, which allows for
efficient information transfer. The architecture of the synapse is formed during development and can change in an activity-
dependent manner.
9.14 Molecular Mechanisms of Presynaptic Differentiation
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter09.html 6/17

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Synapse Formation, Survival, and Elimination (Section 1, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscie…
PLAY
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 9.18
A growth cone matures into a presynaptic axon
terminal. As an axon grows toward its target, its growth
cone plays a role in "sensing" attractive and repulsive
forces in its local environment. After the axon has c 2000 UTHSCH
reached its target, the terminal matures by altering its
shape, the localization of vesicles, and the protein
Figure 9.17
machinery necessary for regulated and constitutive,
Short- and long-range cues act to guide axon growth.
rather than solely constitutive, secretion. These
These guidance effects can be attractive or repulsive.
dramatic changes allow the axon terminal to provide
Axons may use several, or all, of these forces for
efficient synaptic transmission.
navigation of single segments of movement. For example,
a repellent from behind will "push" an axon into a corridor
marked by permissive local cues and bounded by repulsive
The presynaptic nerve terminal matures from the growth cone and
factors, whereas an attractant at the end of the corridor
becomes highly specialized to subserve functions necessary for
may "pull" the axon toward its target (purple cell). In
chemical neurotransmission. The presynaptic nerve terminal contains
additional, contact attraction or axonal fasciculation (e.g.,
mitochondria and endosomes, although the most striking aspect of this
the purple axon uses the blue axon as a guidance cue)
structure is the presence of numerous neurotransmitter-containing
help in axonal pathfinding.
synaptic vesicles. Relatively little is known about the molecular
mechanisms that underlie differentiation of the presynaptic nerve
terminal. It is known that the switch between constitutive vesicle cycling that takes place in the growth cone, and regulated
secretion from the mature presynaptic terminal represents a dramatic alteration in function.
9.15 Molecular Mechanisms of Postsynaptic Differentiation
In order for efficient reception of the neurotransmitter signal, the receptors on
the postsynaptic cell are clustered at sites opposite the presynaptic active zone.
The clustering of postsynaptic receptors is an adaptive behavior that has been
studied in detail using the neuromuscular junction as a model system. The
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (AChR) is a ligand-gated ion channel that
responds to a signal provided by the neurotransmitter acetylcholine, the
transmitter used at the neuromuscular junction. (Additional information about
acetylcholine is found in Chapter 11.) AChRs are found at a density of 10,000-
20,000/um2 in the postsynaptic membrane while there are about 10/um2 at
extrasynaptic sites. The extraordinary concentration of AChRs at the synapse
suggests that the muscle has the capacity to anchor these receptors, while their
presence in direct opposition to the presynaptic active zone suggests that the
nerve plays a role in organizing the postsynaptic membrane.
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 9.19
Scaffolding present on the presynaptic and
postsynaptic sides of the synapse helps to
mature and align the pre- and postsynaptic
elements. For example, neuroligin interacts
with neurexin to anchor the pre- and
PLAY
postsynaptic elements together. In addition,
the presence of neuroligin enables clustering of
synaptic vesicles, suggesting that this protein is
involved in presynaptic differentiation. On the
Figure 9.20 postsynaptic side, receptors and some of their
Differentiation of the synapse signal transducing proteins are anchored in
involves alterations to both the pre- place via direct and indirect (via binding to
and postsynaptic sites. The cytoskeletal binding proteins) interactions with
presynaptic terminal must align the actin cytoskeleton.
with a postsynaptic surface and
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter09.html 7/17

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Synapse Formation, Survival, and Elimination (Section 1, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscie…
begin to express regulated forms of
neurotransmitter secretion. The
postsynaptic site must cluster
receptors and signal transduction
molecules for efficient synaptic
transmission.
The cleft separating pre- and postsynaptic membranes contains the basal lamina which coats the entire muscle fiber and is
composed of collagens, proteoglycans, and other extracellular matrix molecules including laminin as well as nerve-derived
molecules such as agrin (see Chapter 9 part 6). The basal lamina plays a critical role in the assembly of the postsynaptic
membrane.
9.16 Agrin
Much of our knowledge about synapse formation comes from studies on nerve-muscle regeneration. Basal lamina patches that are
allowed to contact damaged muscle tissue induce the regenerating myotubes to form postsynaptic specializations. These studies
suggested that there is an AChR clustering agent in the basal lamina. Agrin was purified from basal lamina extracts as a molecule
that is capable of inducing formation of clusters of AChRs on myotubes. Further study showed that agrin is present in motor
neurons, is transported down motor neuron axons and is retained in the synaptic basal lamina. Antibodies against agrin inhibit
AChR clustering. Agrin deficient mice have disorganized neuromuscular junctions and have decreased number, size, and density of
AChRs at the neuromuscular junction. Thus, agrin appears to be a nerve-derived factor that organizes postsynaptic differentiation.
Agrin may bind to several candidate receptors including alpha-dystroglycan, heparan sulfate proteoglycans, and a muscle-specific
tyrosine kinase (MUSK) to produce its effects.
c 2000 UTHSCH
PLAY
Figure 9.21
c 2000 UTHSCH
PLAY
Figure 9.22
The synaptic basal lamina possesses proteins that act in pre- and postsynaptic
differentiation. A cross section of a normal muscle that contains a nerve terminal
directly opposite from the AChRs on the junctional fold of the muscle is shown in
Figures 9.21 - 9.22. The basal lamina (BL) ensheaths the myofiber, while the synaptic
basal lamina surrounds the synaptic site. The BL serves as a scaffold for regenerating
myofibers. In the experiment shown, axons innervating the muscle were damaged
and prevented from regenerating and the muscle was injured. New myofibers
regenerate within the BL of the original myofiber in the absence of the nerve. In
addition, AChRs cluster despite the absence of the nerve. This result shows that the
synaptic BL contains signals for clustering AChRs (postsynaptic differentiation). If
the motor axon and the muscle are damaged and the muscle is prevented from
regenerating, axons regenerate to the original synaptic site in the absence of their
targets. Thus, the synaptic BL contains signals for presynaptic differentiation.
The muscle plasma membrane has AChRs on its surface, which are uniformly distributed before the motor nerve growth cone
arrives. Shortly after innervation, the distribution of extrajunctional receptors decreases and the density of receptors at the newly
forming neuromuscular synapse increases dramatically. This effect occurs precisely at the site where the growth cone releases ACh.
These changes occur by the redistribution of existing receptors and the synthesis and insertion of new receptors at synapses.
The axon of the motor neuron induces ACh receptors to cluster on muscle fibers. As the axon approaches the muscle fiber most of
the AChRs are distributed diffusely on its surface. When the axon begins to establish synaptic transmission, the distribution of
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter09.html 8/17

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Synapse Formation, Survival, and Elimination (Section 1, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscie…
AChRs begins to change. AChRs begin to cluster at the newly formed synaptic contact, while
c 2000 UTHSCH extrasynaptic receptors decrease dramatically.
What factors are responsible for the changes in AChR density during nerve-muscle
formation? It is NOT the release of ACh from nerve terminals. Increased AChR density
during neuromuscular junction formation results from release of molecules from motor nerve
terminals, including AChR inducing activity (ARIA), a molecule that promotes an increase in
total AChR and receptor clusters, and Agrin, a protein that induces clustering of pre-existing
AChRs and other components of the NMJ.
PLAY During nerve-muscle synapse formation, these biological properties of AChRs change after
innervation:
1. The turnover rate of receptors decreases.
2. Their conductance properties increase.
Figure 9.23
3. Receptor open time decreases.
4. The subunit composition of individual receptors at the NMJ changes during development.
9.17 Neuronal Survival/Synapse Elimination
At the neuromuscular junction, synapses compete for innervation of a muscle fiber. Although this competition results in a reduction
in the number of synaptic inputs to a muscle, the complexity of each synaptic input increases and the strength of each synapse
increases.
Some Synapses Are Eliminated During Development
Synapse elimination at the neuromuscular junction involves a loss of AChRs and a withdrawal of the presynaptic terminal. Activity-
dependent competition between motor axons favors more active inputs. Direct competition between nerve fibers favors the axon
that is able to compete for trophic factors supplied by the target cell. Indirect competition allows the muscle to select the favored
axon. An additional strategy for synapse elimination may be that the elimination is provoked by a retrograde messenger. Additional
information about retrograde signaling are found in Chapter 14, part 3.
In the adult, almost all muscle fibers are innervated by a single motor neuron. However, early
in development many postsynaptic targets are innervated by multiple nerve terminals (this is
PLAY
true for skeletal muscles). During synapse maturation many nerve terminals disappear.
Synapse elimination is thought to occur by the withdrawal of presynaptic terminals. Although
the number of distinct synaptic inputs to a given target decreases during this process, the
complexity of individual remaining terminals actually increases (individual synapses become
larger and have more complex structures). The net result of this process is an increase in the
overall strength of individual synapses. This process of synapse elimination and
rearrangement plays an important role in sculpting the circuitry of the nervous system and
c 2000 UTHSCH the fine tuning of individual synaptic contacts.
Figure 9.24
The development of connectivity in the central nervous system requires the initiation of
synaptic contacts and the maintenance of the correct number of synapses. It is not clear why,
but it seems that more synapses are created than are eventually required for proper neuronal function. Under these circumstances,
some synapses are eliminated. The process of synapse elimination allows for a "use dependent" form of Darwinism; those synapses
that are necessary are retained while those that are simply redundant are removed. The neuromuscular junction and the visual
system have been used as models to provide insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying synapse elimination.
c 2000 UTHSCH c 2000 UTHSCH c 2000 UTHSCH
PLAY PLAY PLAY
Synapse elimination can result from activity-dependent signals in the postsynaptic cell.
Figure 9.25 Figure 9.26 Figure 9.27
Postsynaptic receptor When two inputs are When all receptors are silent
activation by active neuronal differentially activated, the there is an even input to each
inputs results in a stabilization active receptors are protected synapse resulting in no synapse
of multiple inputs. Thus, when and the inactive ones are not, loss.
all of the receptors are resulting in a loss of the
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter09.html 9/17

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Synapse Formation, Survival, and Elimination (Section 1, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscie…
activated simultaneously and inactive receptors and their
their signaling processes associated presynaptic
(cloud) engaged, there is no elements.
loss of receptors (gray) from
the synapse.
Summary
1. A neuron's ability to reach its target is essential for its survival.
2. During development, there is association between the number of presynaptic neurons and the size of their targets.
3. Synapse formation is a complex and gradual process.
4. Specific molecules from neurons and muscles play important roles in synapse formation and in regeneration (e.g., agrin).
5. Finally, synapse elimination and rearrangement result in the fine tuning of neuronal circuitry and synapse strengthening in the
nervous system.
9.18 Cell Death, Injury/Regeneration, and Trophic Factors
In most developing tissues, substantial cell death occurs during development. One type of cell death occurs in an activity-
dependent manner and is related to synapse elimination (see above). Cell death has been suggested to be the default pathway for
all cells, and cells that escape do so by receiving appropriate trophic support. With the growing realization that pathological cell
death shares features in common with cell death that occurs during development, a better understanding of developmental cell
death may reveal potential therapeutic strategies for the treatment of neurodegenerative disorders and trauma.
The formation of synaptic connections between a presynaptic neuron and its target is often critical to the survival of the presynaptic
neuron. In many cases if a synapse is not formed, or if an incorrect synapse is made, then the presynaptic neuron will eventually
die. The survival of neurons is often dependent on trophic factors that are produced by the target tissue. Trophic factors are
essential for neuron survival; their function is to promote cell growth. (Note: trophic factors should not be confused with
chemotropic factors that attract cells.)
9.19 Survival of Certain Neurons Depends on NGF
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 9.28
Nerve growth factor was purified on the basis of its
ability to induce neurite outgrowth. In addition, NGF
was shown to be required for the survival of
sympathetic neurons. These early studies suggested
that a supply of an endogenous factor is limiting for the
survival and growth of dependent cell populations.
Early studies on cultured sensory and sympathetic neurons suggested that they require a target-derived factor (nerve growth
factor, NGF) for their survival. Competition for NGF occurs when multiple axons innervate a single target that has limited amounts
of NGF. Innervating axons possess NGF receptors that bind, internalize, and retrogradely transport NGF. The biochemical cascade
produced by NGF internalization and transport results in signals that prevent cell death.
The prototypic trophic factor is NGF; purified NGF is a complex of three protein subunits (alpha, beta, gamma):
alpha: this subunit has an unknown function
beta: this component has biological activity (dimer)
gamma: this subunit has proteolytic activity
One of the first physiological roles that was discovered for NGF was its importance in the survival of sensory and sympathetic
neurons. If anti-NGF antibodies are injected into newborn animals to "neutralize" the actions of NGF the survival of sympathetic
neurons is greatly reduced.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter09.html 10/17

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Synapse Formation, Survival, and Elimination (Section 1, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscie…
c 2000 UTHSCH
PLAY
PLAY
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 9.29 Figure 9.30
Nerve growth factor is a retrograde NGF is secreted by target cells and bound by receptors on the
survival factor. NGF (red dots) is bound by dependent cell. After binding, the receptor/ligand complex is
receptors on the blue cell and is internalized in a vesicle within the axon terminal. These endocytic
retrogradely transported down its axon to vesicles are transported on microtubules to the cell body where NGF
the cell body where it affects cell growth, disassociates from its receptor and can affect transcriptional
differentiation, and transcription of other machinery and cellular differentiation.
genes.
For developing neurons in the superior cervical ganglion the natural source of NGF can be
blocked by the daily injections of anti-NGF antibodies into newborn animals. This treatment NGF
results in the premature death of these neurons. In contrast, if newborn animals are
injected with NGF itself, the added NGF actually prevents the naturally occurring death of
certain types of neurons.
The cellular actions of growth factors (NGF, BDNF, NT-3, NT-4) are mediated by specific cell
surface receptors. The high affinity NGF receptor is a tyrosine kinase that confers the
biological activity of NGF to cells by acting through downstream signaling processes that
eventually involve alterations in gene transcription. This kinase is known as trkA. Other
growth factors bind to different receptor tyrosine kinases. For example, TrkB is specifically
activated by low concentrations of BDNF and NT-4/5, and can be activated by high
concentrations of NT-3.TrkC is related to trkA, but is most effectively activated by NT-3; all
trks are transmembrane proteins that contain an extracellular ligand binding domain and
PI-3 kinase SHC
an intracellular (cytosolic) tyrosine kinase domain. When trks are activated by the
appropriate ligand (e.g., NGF or BDNF) they initiate a series of intracellular signaling
cascades.
PLAY
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 9.31
The cellular actions of growth factors
(NGF, BDNF, NT-3, NT-4) are
mediated by specific cell surface
receptors. See the text below for
more information.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter09.html 11/17

c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 9.32
Possible consequences of NGF deprivation in cells. Withdrawal of NGF from dependent cells results in the initiation of signaling
processes that eventually result in cell death. Specific cellular events are in black along a continuum from signaling processes
to DNA cleavage. Possible targets for therapeutic intervention are in red.
NGF is related to other trophic factors such as BDNF, NT-3, NT-4, and
Figure 9.33
CNTF. These factors are structurally related to NGF and are survival
Sources of trophic
factors for neurons that do not respond to NGF. Trophic signals produced
support for motor
by some of these molecules are not all target-derived like NGF. Neurons
neurons of the
may receive trophic signals from molecules in the extracellular matrix,
spinal cord. Motor
from glia, and in an autocrine or paracrine manner. Withdrawal of these
neurons
factors results in cell death for neuronal populations that are dependent
(purple/blue)
on these factors.
receive trophic
support from a
Disruption of different neurotrophin genes in mice has allowed analysis of
number of sources.
the role of these factors in sensory-motor pathways. The dorsal root
Axon terminals
ganglia (DRG) of wild-type mice possess small (red), medium (green),
receive diffusable
and large (blue) cells. The small cells that carry pain and temperature
(1) or matrix-
information are lost when NGF or its high affinity receptor, trkA, are
associated (2)
missing. Large cells that innervate muscle spindles are lost when NT-3 or
factors from
TrkC are missing. These data underline the importance of different
muscle. Schwann
neurotrophins in supporting the development of distinct cell populations.
cells (3) and glial
cells (4) including
astrocytes and
oligodendrocytes
can also provide
trophic support.
Afferents from the
DRG (5) and
autocrine (6), c 2000 UTHSCH
paracrine (6), or
circulating factors
can also influence
motor neuron
survival.
HCSHTU
0002
c
1/7/25, 2:28 AM Synapse Formation, Survival, and Elimination (Section 1, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscie…
Figure 9.34
9.20 Neurons in the Peripheral Nervous System Can Regenerate Their Axons
The ability of PNS neurons to regenerate their axons contrasts sharply to damaged neurons in the CNS. This difference is due in
large part to the role of trophic factors, which prevent the degeneration of peripheral neurons after axotomy. What happens when
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter09.html 12/17

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Synapse Formation, Survival, and Elimination (Section 1, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscie…
the axons of adult sympathetic neurons are cut?
1. If axons of postsynaptic neurons are cut, then presynaptic neurons withdraw their axon terminals.
2. If exogenous NGF is added, then regeneration and reinnervation occurs.
3. On the other hand, if anti-NGF antibodies are added to neutralize NGF, then regeneration is blocked.
4. Moreover, if colchicine (which depolymerizes microtubules) is added to block the retrograde transport of NGF from the target
cell to the damaged sympathetic neuron's cell body, then regeneration is inhibited.
Reactions of sympathetic neurons to injury:
Figure 9.35
Normal anatomical
relationships among postsynaptic neuron
autonomic presynaptic
and sympathetic presynaptic
postsynaptic neurons and
terminal
a target tissue; the latter
provides necessary trophic
factors (e.g., NGF). PLAY
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 9.36
When axons of
postsynaptic neurons are
injured, presynaptic
terminals retract.
PLAY
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 9.37
If exogenous NGF is
supplied the presynaptic
terminals are maintained.
PLAY
2000UTHSCH
Figure 9.38
If neutralizing anti-NGF
antibodies are added near
the target tissue, the
supply of NGF is blocked
and presynaptic terminals
retract.
PLAY
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 9.39
NGF is supplied to the cell
body by microtubule-
dependent axoplasmic
transport; if this is
blocked by colchicine,
then presynaptic terminals
retract.
c 2000 UTHSCH PLAY
9.21 Neuronal Regeneration
This section focuses on the serious, and often irreversible, damage to central and peripheral nervous systems caused by injury to
neurons. In almost every case, neurons have withdrawn from the mitotic cycle and therefore can no longer divide to produce new
neurons to replace damaged cells. Therefore, neuron loss due to injury has profound results, since the loss of affected pathways
will permanently change the functional circuitry of the nervous system. In those cases where neurons do regenerate following
injury, the mechanisms that contribute to regeneration appear to be very similar to the events that promote axon growth and
synapse formation during development. Several general rules govern neuronal responses to injury:
Regeneration in mammals is much poorer than lower vertebrates.
Regeneration in the CNS is much less likely than in the PNS.
Trophic factors play important roles in neuronal regeneration.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter09.html 13/17

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Synapse Formation, Survival, and Elimination (Section 1, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscie…
Neurons in the peripheral nervous system can regenerate their axons. This contrasts with the general inability of damaged neurons
in the CNS to regenerate. The regeneration of peripheral neurons is due in large part to the role of trophic factors which provide an
important function in preventing their degeneration after axotomy. Some of the same molecules required for immature neurons to
develop and survive are also involved in the survival of adult neurons after injury. For example, if the axons of an adult sympathetic
neuron are cut, the axon terminals of afferent neurons withdraw their axon terminals. However, if exogenous NGF is added, then
regeneration and reinnervation occurs. If anti-NGF antibodies are added to neutralize NGF, then regeneration is blocked. Blocking
the retrograde transport of NGF from the target cell to the damaged sympathetic neuron's cell body also inhibits regeneration.
Thus, NGF is required for the regeneration and maintenance of peripheral synaptic connections in the adult PNS.
Schwann cells also contribute to the regeneration of peripheral axons. During damage and regeneration of axons, macrophages are
activated and invade damaged areas. They secrete mitogenic factors that stimulate Schwann cell proliferation. Glial cell proliferation
results in the increased secretion of extracellular matrix molecules and helps to promote adhesion between the regenerating axons
and the remaining supporting cells. The synthesis and secretion of NGF is also stimulated under these conditions and provides
important short-term conditions for regeneration. Thus, NGF plays another role in regeneration because it is produced by
components of the peripheral nervous system that are not themselves postsynaptic targets.
9.22 Neurons of the CNS Have Very Limited Capacity To Regenerate
Damage to CNS neurons is often irreversible. Why are CNS neurons different than peripheral neurons in this regard? In the adult
brain important ECM molecules like laminin and fibronectin are no longer expressed and thus important adhesion molecules are
absent from the regenerating environment. In addition, oligodendroglia (the myelinating cells of the CNS) express growth inhibitory
molecules in the adult that block axon regrowth.
As discussed above, the environment and properties of peripheral nerves are much more supportive of the regeneration process.
For example, Schwann Cells secrete NGF, ECM and other adhesive molecules that are critical for neuronal survival and axon
regeneration. In addition, Schwann cells do not express molecules that inhibit axon growth like oligodendroglia in the CNS. The use
of peripheral nerve grafts to promote regeneration of damaged nerves in the CNS is one possible way to overcome the limited
regeneration potential of CNS neurons.
For example, following transection of the optic nerve, if a section of peripheral nerve is attached to the cut end of the optic nerve
and its other end is inserted into superior colliculus, then regeneration of the optic nerve can occur. Evidence supporting the
functional regeneration of the cut optic nerves includes:
1. Retinal ganglion axons regenerated and reinnervated the superior colliculus.
2. New synapses are formed which last for at least one year.
3. These new synapses are functional; if retinal neurons are activated by light, then postsynaptic neurons in the colliculus
respond (they also respond to direct electrical stimulation of retinal neurons).
4. Experimental subjects with PNS nerve grafts have partially restored light avoidance behavior.
5. Administration of growth factors during nerve grafts can enhance regeneration.
NGF also appears to play an important role in the survival of cholinergic neurons of the basal forebrain where neurons degenerate
in Alzheimer's disease.
PLAY
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 9.40
General Relationships between Pre- and Postsynaptic Neurons During
Injury and Regeneration.
Following damage to an axon by cutting, a sequence of changes occurs during degeneration. Under certain conditions, both
retrograde and anterograde transneuronal degeneration can occur.
1. Cutting an axon divides it into proximal and distal segments
2. Immediately after injury, axons begin to seal off, however, Ca2+ enters damaged axonal elements and activates Ca2+-
dependent proteases
3. Rapid failure of synaptic transmission occurs within hours (depending on where the axon is cut relative to the distal-proximal
axis; metabolic and protein synthetic machinery remains in the cell body)
4. Within days presynaptic terminals begin to degenerate and in about 1 week invading glia disrupt and phagocytose synaptic
contacts
5. The distal segment degenerates slowly and may take up to 1 month; the loss of distal segments is called Wallerian
degeneration
6. There are also major changes that occur in the neuronal cell body during degeneration; a few days after axotomy, the process
of chromatolysis starts in the soma:
a. RER (rough endoplasmic reticulum) breaks down and moves to periphery of the cell body (or soma).
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter09.html 14/17

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Synapse Formation, Survival, and Elimination (Section 1, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscie…
b. There is an increase in free polyribosomes, mRNA transcription and protein synthesis (the injured neuron's response to
injury is to increase its metabolic rebuilding).
c. A damaged neuron's success in regeneration is linked to its ability to find an appropriate target to reinnervate; failure to
contact a target usually results in cell death.
If the injured neuron survives damage (and this often depends on the appropriate trophic factors being present), the process of
reinnervation begins:
1. The axon's proximal segment forms sprouts and the process of regrowth begins.
2. Axonal sprouts migrate into the conduit formed by the residual endoneural sheath that surrounded the previous axon.
3. Axon sprouts migrate to find a target; if a suitable target is found, the neuron survives; if not, the neuron dies.
Cellular damage is not restricted to injured neurons; degeneration is often
transneuronal or transsynaptic. In the visual pathway, damage of retinal ganglion c 2000 UTHSCH
neurons often results in degeneration of downstream target neurons in the
lateral geniculate and even to neurons in the visual cortex. This is called
transsynaptic anterograde degeneration. This process can also happen in the
reverse direction (i.e., damage to visual cortex neurons can result in
degeneration of geniculate and then retinal neurons), and is called transsynaptic
retrograde degeneration.
PLAY
Traumatic injury to neurons is often irreversible. However, in those instances in
which neurons do regenerate following injury, the mechanisms that contribute to
regeneration are similar to those events that contribute to axonal growth and
synapse formation during development.
During normal development synapse formation is a gradual process that results
in one muscle fiber becoming innervated by one motor axon. Following axotomy, Figure 9.41
the postsynaptic structures called synaptic gutters remain on the surface of the
muscle fiber.
During reinnervation, the nerve forms new synaptic contacts at the old synaptic gutters: the one-to-one relationship between nerve
and muscle fiber is maintained.
9.23 New Frontiers - Tissue/Cell Transplants
A large number of crippling neurological conditions result from the loss of certain cell populations from the nervous system through
disease or injury, and these cells are not intrinsically replaced. Replacement of depleted cell populations by transplantation may be
of functional benefit in many such diseases. A diverse range of cell populations is vulnerable, and the loss of specific populations
results in circumscribed deficits in different conditions. This diversity presents a considerable challenge if cell replacement therapy is
to become widely applicable in the clinical domain, because each condition has specific requirements for the phenotype,
developmental stage, and number of cells required.
New discoveries have made inroads in the use of immortalized cell lines to replace or supplement the decreased or lost functions of
damaged nervous system tissues. There have also been limited advances in the area of transplantation using fetal tissues (however,
this approach is ethically controversial). Areas in which these new approaches have been tried include:
1. the synthesis and secretion of catecholamines in patients with Parkinson's disease
2. the synthesis and secretion of growth/trophic factors (e.g., NGF) in patients with Alzheimer's disease
3. the synthesis and secretion of ECM and adhesion molecules to promote regeneration in patients with damaged CNS or PNS
tissues
These approaches are technically complicated at both cellular and molecular levels. One of the problems encountered is that
although tissue or cell transplants seem to have positive short-term benefits, their long-term effects have been limited.
9.24 Stem Cells
An ideal cell for universal application in cell replacement therapy would possess several key properties: it would be highly
proliferative, allowing the ex vivo production of large numbers of cells from minimal donor material; it would also remain immature
and phenotypically plastic such that it could differentiate into appropriate neural and glial cell types on, or prior to, transplantation.
Critically, both proliferation and differentiation would be controllable. Neural stem cells exist not only in the developing mammalian
nervous system but also in the adult nervous system of all mammalian organisms, including humans. Neural stem cells can also be
derived from more primitive embryonic stem cells. The cells can be expanded, established in continuous cell lines and differentiated
into the three classical neuronal phenotypes (neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes). The mechanisms that regulate
endogenous stem cells are poorly understood. Potential uses of stem cells in repair include transplantation to repair missing cells
and the activation of endogenous cells to provide "self-repair. " Before the full potential of neural stem cells can be realized, we
must understand what controls their proliferation, as well as the various pathways of differentiation available to their daughter cells.
9.25 Summary
Postsynaptic targets supply critical neurotrophic factors.
1. In addition to NGF, several neurotrophic factors have been identified (e.g., BDNF and neurotrophin 3).
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter09.html 15/17

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Synapse Formation, Survival, and Elimination (Section 1, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscie…
2. Reactions of neurons to injury can vary dramatically; neurons usually survive if functional connections are formed during the
regeneration process.
3. Although regeneration is possible in the PNS, regeneration in the CNS is poor or nonexistent.
Future biomedical research will continue to actively pursue approaches to restore the function of damaged neuronal tissues. The
future of understanding important molecules and mechanisms that underlie regeneration lies in basic neurobiological research.
Areas to receive attention include:
1. The identification of new cell-surface and extracellular matrix molecules that promote axon growth and regeneration.
2. The identification and production of new trophic factors that are essential for cell survival and growth.
3. The examination of potential use of embryonic stem cells to functionally replace lost neurons.
4. In addition, tissue transplantation and peripheral nerve grafts will continue to be studied since they represent one of the most
viable approaches to CNS regeneration.
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
All of the following are guidance cues for axonal outgrowth and pathfinding EXCEPT:
A. Cell surface adhesion molecules
B. Directional cues from guidepost cells
C. Pioneer axons
D. Filopodia
E. Extracellular Matrix Molecules
Question 2 A B C D E
Agrin:
A. Is taken up at the nerve terminal and moved by retrograde transport to the cell body
B. Is important for the survival of all neurons
C. Is a muscle derived factor
D. Is a nerve derived factor
E. Binds to acetylcholine receptors
Question 3 A B C D E
Which of the following is a guidance cue for axonal outgrowth and pathfinding?
A. Actin
B. Stem cells
C. Fasciculation
D. Filopodium
E. Lamellipodium
Question 4 A B C D E
Synapses...
A. ... are stabilized by growth factor withdrawal.
B. ... are stabilized by chemoattraction.
C. ... are eliminated by oligodendrocytes.
D. ... are eliminated if they are not active.
E. ... are eliminated by agrin.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter09.html 16/17

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Synapse Formation, Survival, and Elimination (Section 1, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscie…
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter09.html 17/17



1/7/25, 2:28 AM Organization of Cell Types (Section 1, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department …
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 1: Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology
Search
Chapter 8: Organization of Cell Types
Jack C. Waymire, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
Revised 08 March 2021
8.1 Introduction to Neurons and OOrrggaanniizzaattiioonn ooff CCeellll TTyyppee vv22
Glial Cells
The human nervous system is estimated to consist of
roughly 360 billion non-neural glial cells and 90 billion
nerve cells. Furthermore, there are hundreds of
different types of neurons based on morphology
alone. Often, neurons that look similar have strikingly
different properties. For example, they utilize and
respond to different neurotransmitter(s). This section
reviews the cellular components of nervous tissue.
Students should be able to describe neurons and glia,
their morphological components as seen with the light
and electron microscope, and some of the
fundamental functional roles these cell types play in
the nervous system.
Video of lecture
8.2 Model Neuron
Figure 8.1
Click on the parts of the Model Neuron to view structures.
After reviewing the Model Neuron above, learn more about the function of each structure by clicking from the list below.
1. Cell Soma
2. Dendrite
3. Initial Segment and Axon Hillock
4. Axon
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter08.html 1/13

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Organization of Cell Types (Section 1, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department …
5. Nerve Endings
6. Neuromuscular Junction
8.3 Cell Soma
The region of the neuron containing the nucleus is known as the cell body, soma, or
perikaryon (Figure 8.2). The cell body is the metabolic center of the neuron.
The interior of the soma consists of cytoplasm, a gel within a microtrabecular lattice
formed by the microtubules and associated proteins that make up the cytoskeleton.
Energy producing metabolism and the synthesis of the macromolecules used by the cell to
maintain its structure and execute its function are the principal activities of the neuronal
soma. As described in Chapter 6, it also acts as a receptive area for synaptic inputs from
other cells. Embedded within the neuronal cytoplasm are the organelles common to other
cells, the nucleus, nucleolus, endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus,
mitochondria, ribosomes, lysosomes, endosomes, and peroxisomes. Many of these
Click the identified structures on the cell inclusions are responsible for the expression of genetic information controlling the
model neuron to move to the related synthesis of cellular proteins involved in energy production, growth, and replacement of
section. materials lost by attrition.
Figure 8.2 (See enlarged view)
Diagrammatic representation of the neuron cell body or
perikaryon emphasizing the endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi
apparatus and cytoskeleton. Place cursor over image to
identify organelles.
8.4 Dendrites
The membrane of the neuron functions as a receptive surface over its entire extent;
however, specific inputs (termed afferents) from other cells are received primarily on the
surface of the cell body and on the surface of the specialized processes known as
dendrites. The dendritic processes may branch extensively and are often covered with
projections known as dendritic spines. Spines provide a tremendous increase in the
surface area available for synaptic contacts. The dendritic processes and spines of neurons
are essentially expansions of cytoplasm containing most of the organelles found in the cell
body. Dendrites contain numerous orderly arrays of microtubules and fewer
neurofilaments (see below). The microtubule associated proteins (MAPs) in the dendrite
have a higher molecular weight than those found in the axon. An example is MAP2. In
addition, microtubules in dendrites have their positive ends toward the cell soma.
Mitochondria are often arranged longitudinally. Rough endoplasmic reticulum and
Click the identified structures on the ribosomes are present in large but not small dendrites. The shape and extent of the
model neuron to move to the related "dendritic tree" of an individual neuron is indicative of the quantity and variety of
section. information received and processed by that neuron. The dendritic spines often contain
microfilaments which is the cytoskeletal element responsible for changes in spine
shape observed in some examples of synaptic plasticity.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter08.html 2/13

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Organization of Cell Types (Section 1, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department …
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 8.3 (See enlarged view)
Diagrammatic representation of the neuron dendrite,
emphasizing the areas of contact by other afferent
inputs to the neuron.
View a light-microscopic slide of a dendrite with spines
View an EM slide of a dendrite and a spine
Information is received by the dendrite through an array of receptors on dendrite surface that react to transmitters released from
the axon terminals of other neurons. Dendrites may consist of a single twig-like extension from the soma or a multi-branched
network capable of receiving inputs from thousands of other cells. For instance, an average spinal motor neuron with a moderate-
sized dendritic tree, receives 10,000 contacts, with 2,000 of these on the soma and 8,000 on the dendrites.
8.5 Initial Segment and Axon Hillock
The cone-shaped region of the cell body where the axon originates is termed the axon
hillock. This area is free of ribosomes and most other cell organelles, with the exception
of cytoskeletal elements and organelles that are being transported down the axon. The
neurofilaments in the axon hillock become clustered together as fascicles. The region
between the axon hillock and the beginning of the myelin sheath is known as the initial
segment. In many cases, this region is the anatomical location for the initiation of the
action potential. The area under the axolemma in this region has material that stains
darkly when viewed by EM. This region is shown in Figure 8.4. At the distal-most end of
the axon and its collaterales are small branches whose tips are button-shaped cytoplasmic
enlargements called terminal boutons or nerve endings.
Click the identified structures on the
model neuron to move to the related
section.
c 2000 UTHSCH
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter08.html 3/13

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Organization of Cell Types (Section 1, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department …
Figure 8.4 (See enlarged view)
Diagrammatic representation of the initial segment of
a neuron, emphasizing the areas in which the action
potential is initiated.
View a light-microscopic slide of an axon hillock of a sensory neuron
View an EM slide of an axon hillock
8.6 Axon
The other type of process in the idealized neuron is the axon. Each neuron has only one
axon and it is usually straighter and smoother than the dendritic profiles. Axons also
contain bundles of microtubules and neurofilaments and scattered mitochondria. The
most MAPs in an axon have a lower molecular weight than those in the dendrite. A
predominant MAP in axons is tau. Microfilaments within the axon are usually associated
with an area adjacent to the plasmalemma and often are the most dense at the nodes of
Ranvier. Beyond the initial segments, the axoplasm lacks rough endoplasmic reticulum
and free ribosomes. The branches of axons are known as axon collaterales. The axon
itself is often surrounded by a membranous material, called the myelin sheath, formed by
glia cells. The myelin sheath acts to insulate the plasmalemma of the axon in a way that
necessitates the more rapid spread of the depolarization of the plasmalemma and
increases the speed of conduction of the nerve impulse (see Chapter 3).
Click the identified structures on the
model neuron to move to the related c 2000 UTHSCH
section.
Figure 8.5 (see enlarged view)
Diagrammatic representation of
the axon emphasizing the areas
of microtubules, neurofilaments
coursing within the cytoplasm.
8.7 Nerve Ending
The part of the plasma membrane of the nerve ending that is specialized to form functional
contacts with other cells is the synapse.
Click the identified structures on the
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter08.html 4/13

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Organization of Cell Types (Section 1, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department …
model neuron to move to the related c 2000 UTHSCH
section.
Figure 8.6
Diagrammatic representation of an
excitatory synapse, showing the
spherical vesicles and the
presynaptic density.
View an EM of a nerve ending with
spherical vesicles.
When neurons interact with muscle fibers, the region of functional contact is called the neuromuscular junction or motor
endplate (Chapter 4). According to the classical definition of synapse, when a nerve ending synapses on a dendrite or soma of a
second neuron it is termed either an axodendritic or an axosomatic synapse, respectively (Chapter 7). However, almost all
possible combinations of pre- and postsynaptic elements have been found in the central nervous system. These different types of
synapse are designated by combining the name of the structure of the presynaptic element with that of the postsynaptic structure.
For example, when the transfer of information occurs from an axon to axon or from one terminal to another, the synapse involved is
called an axoaxonic synapse.
8.8 Cellular Elements at the Typical Nerve Terminal
Regions of functional contacts between neurons (synapses) have distinct morphological characteristics. Although a great deal of
variation exists in the size and shape of boutons of individual neurons, synapses can be identified by the presence of the following:
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 8.7
Diagrammatic representation of an
excitatory synapse, showing the
spherical vesicles and the
presynaptic density.
View an EM of a nerve ending with
flat vesicles.
1. A presynaptic complement of membrane-bound synaptic vesicles exists. These are spherical vesicles in excitatory nerve
endings, shown in Figure 8.6. In inhibitory neurons the synaptic vesicle are often flattened as shown in Figure 8.7.
2. The nerve ending often has aggregations of dense material in the cytoplasm immediately adjacent to the membrane on the
pre- and postsynaptic side of the junction (these are known as presynaptic density or postsynaptic density, respectively.) This
dense material on the presynaptic side is thought to be the site of vesicle attachment. The dense material on the
postsynaptic side is a site where receptor proteins and channels are prevalent.
3. Many mitochondria are present, especially in the nerve terminal; and
4. There is a distinct synaptic cleft or intercellular space of approximately 20-40 nm.
5. An endoplasmic reticulum is present that regulates Ca2+ level.
6. Endosomal membrane that functions in the recycling of synaptic vesicles.
8.9 Structural Variations
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter08.html 5/13

Numerous variations of the "model" neuron described above exist. An important modification, which occurs especially in receptor
neurons, involves the designation of a neuronal process as a dendrite or as an axon. Classically, the axon has been identified as
the myelinated or unmyelinated process that transmits signals away from the cell body. The classical view of the dendrite is that of
an unmyelinated tube of cytoplasm which carries information toward the cell body. However, this distinction does not hold for ALL
neurons. Some cells have a myelinated process that transmits signals toward the cell body. Morphologically the "dendrite" and the
"axon" may, therefore, be indistinguishable. Neither the position of the cell body nor the presence or absence of myelin is always a
useful criterion for understanding the orientation of the neuron. The region of impulse initiation is more reliable guide to
understanding the functional focal point of the cell. This region is analogous to the initial segment of the model neuron, discussed
above. Routinely the fiber or process, which contains the initial segment or trigger zone, is referred to as an axon. Note, as shown
in Figure 8.8, the trigger zone does not have to be immediately adjacent to the cell body.
Figure 8.8
Comparison of variations in the structure of neurons
8.10 Naming Neurons
A number of conventions have evolved to classify and name neurons. One of the oldest, devised by Golgi in the late 1800’s, is
based on the complexity of the dendritic tree of the neuron. Through this approach cells are classified as unipolar, bipolar and
multipolar neurons as shown in Figure 8.8. Unipolar cells have only one cell process, and are primarily found in invertebrates.
However, vertebrate sensory neurons are another form of this type of cell. Because these cells start out developmentally as bipolar
neurons and then become unipolar as they mature, they are called pseudo-unipolar cells. Bipolar cells are present in the retina
and the olfactory bulb. Multipolar cells make up the remainder of neuronal types and are, consequently, the most numerous
type. These have been further sub-categorized into Golgi type II cells that are small neurons, usually interneurons, and Golgi
type I cells that are large multipolar neurons.
Cells are also named for their shape (e.g., pyramidal cells shown in Figure 8.9) or for the person who first described them (e.g.,
Purkinje cells shown in Figure 8.10). More recently, cells have been named for their function or the neurotransmitter they contain
(e.g., CNS norepinephrine cell groups covered in Chapter 12). This description is possible because of the development of
histochemical and immunocytochemical methods to specifically identify the neurotransmitter type used by neurons.
HCSHTU
0002
c
1/7/25, 2:28 AM Organization of Cell Types (Section 1, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department …
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 8.9 Figure 8.10
Two variations in cell morphology. On the left is the pyramidal cell
named for its characteristic pyramid shape. This cell is prominent in the
cerebral cortex. On the right is the cell soma and dendrites of the
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter08.html 6/13

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Organization of Cell Types (Section 1, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department …
Purkinje cell found in the cerebellum and named for the scientist,
Purkinje.
View the shape of a pyramidal cell stained to show its features
View the shape of a Purkinje cell stained to show its features
8.11 Organelles
Many of the terms used in this section are defined below.
Axolemma is the plasmalemma of the axon.
Endoplasmic reticulum is a labyrinthine, membrane bounded compartment in the cytoplasm where lipids are synthesized and
membrane bound proteins are made. In some regions of the neuron ER is devoid of ribosomes and is termed smooth ER. The
smooth ER is involved in Ca2+ buffering and in the biosynthesis and recycling of synaptic vesicles as will be discussed in Chapter
10.
Endosome is a membrane-bounded organelle that carries materials ingested by endocytosis and passes them to lysosomes and
peroxisomes for degradation. It also functions in the nerve ending to recycle synaptic vesicles.
Golgi apparatus is a collection of stacked, smooth-surfaced membrane bound organelles where proteins and lipids made in the
endoplasmic reticulum are modified and sorted.
Lysosomes contain enzymes that digest compounds that originate inside or outside the cells. They are involved in converting
proteins to amino acids and glycogen to glucose, the basic nutrient of neurons. Their enzymes act at an acidic pH. As will be
described later, they also serve as vesicles for reverse transport from axon terminals to the soma. Many lysosomes become
degraded to lipofuscin granules, which accumulate as the organism ages and are regarded as neuronal refuse. Lysosomes form
from the budding off the Golgi apparatus. They have a variety of membrane-bound shapes and sizes, ranging in size between 250
and 700 nm in diameter.
Microfilaments are 7 nm in diameter filaments arranged as a paired helix of two strands of globular actin. Microfilaments are
especially prominent in synaptic terminals, in dendritic spines, and in association with the axolemma.
Microtubules are 20 to 25 nm diameter tubular structures that run in loose bundles around the nucleus and funnel into the base of
the axonal and dendritic processes where they form parallel arrays distributed longitudinally. They are made up of dimers of α and β
tubulin subunits and contain associated proteins known as microtubule associated proteins (MAPS). The MAPS regulate the
polymerization of tubulin subunits to form the microtubules. The dimers of α and β tubulin subunits polymerize to form proto-
filaments arranged in an a helix such that 13 dimer subunits make up each full turn of the a helix. In addition, microtubules are not
continuous, and each microtubule is composed of numerous 100 nm units. Microtubules are involved in axoplasmic transport (see
below).
Mitochondria are distributed ubiquitously throughout the cytoplasm of the entire nerve cell and are especially plentiful at
presynaptic specializations.
Neurofilaments are a type of intermediate filament found in nerve cells. Neurofilaments are involved in the maintenance of the
neuron's shape and mechanical strength. Although neuronal neurofilaments are classified as intermediate filaments, their
composition in neurons is different than that found in other cells. They are composed of three subunits that are arranged to form a
10-nm diameter tubule. It is the neurofilament that stains with heavy metal to permit the visualization of neuronal shape.
Neurofilaments run in loose bundles around the cell nucleus and other organelles and funnel into the base of the axonal and
dendritic processes where they form parallel arrays distributed longitudinally. Neurofilaments are more abundant than microtubules
in axons, whereas microtubules are more abundant than neurofilaments in dendrites. It is the neurofilaments that undergo
modification in the Alzheimer's disease to form neurofibrillary tangles.
Nucleolus is in the center of the nuclei of all neurons. It is a prominent, deeply stained spherical inclusion about one-third the size
of the nucleus. The nucleolus synthesizes ribosomal RNA, which has a major role in protein synthesis.
Nucleus of the neuron is large and round and is usually centrally located. In some cells, masses of deeply staining chromatin are
visible in the nucleus. The nuclear membrane of neurons is like that of other cells - a double membrane punctuated by pores
(nuclear pores) which are involved in nuclear-cytoplasmic interactions. The nucleus in neurons is spherical and ranges in diameter
from 3 to 18 micrometers depending on the size of the neuron. Neurons with long axons have a larger cell body and nucleus. As in
other cells, the principal component of the nucleus is deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), the substance of the chromosomes and genes.
Peroxisomes are small membrane bounded organelles that use molecular oxygen to oxidize organic molecules. They contain some
enzymes that either produce or degrade hydrogen peroxide.
Plasmalemma of the neuron appears in the electron microscope as a typical bi-layered cellular membrane, approximately 10 nm
thick.
Postsynaptic density is darkly staining material of postsynaptic cell adjacent to the synapse. Receptors, ion channels, and other
signaling molecules are likely bound to this material.
Presynaptic density is the region of darkly staining material of the presynaptic membrane where synaptic vesicles are
hypothesized to dock prior to fusion with the presynaptic membrane.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter08.html 7/13

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Organization of Cell Types (Section 1, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department …
Ribosomes are particles composed of ribosomal RNA and ribosomal protein which associate with mRNA and catalyze the synthesis
of proteins. When ribosomes are attached to the outer membranes of the ER, the organelle is termed rough ER. The rough ER, in
laminae with interspersed ribosomes, is visible with the light microscope as Nissl substance. In light microscopic preparations, the
appearance of Nissl substance varies in different types of neurons. It may appear as densely stained ovoids or as finely dispersed
particles or aggregations of granules.
Synapse is the junction that allows signals to pass from a nerve cell to another cell or from one nerve cell to a muscle cell. The
synaptic cleft is the gap between the membrane of the pre- and postsynaptic cell. In a chemical synapse the signal is carried by a
diffusable neurotransmitter. The cleft between the presynaptic cell and the postsynaptic cells is 20 to 40 nm wide and may appear
clear or striated. Recent studies have indicated that the cleft is not an empty space per se, but is filled with carbohydrate-containing
material.
Synaptic vesicles are small spherical organelles in the cytoplasm of neurons that contain neurotransmitter and various proteins
necessary for neurotransmitter secretion. Vesicles containing inhibitory neurotransmitter are often flat or elliptical whereas vesicles
that contain excitatory neurotransmitter are usually more spherical.
8.12 Glial Cells and Function
Figure 8.11
Types of neuroglia. Click on the different glial
cells to view the details of their structure and
function.
The most numerous cellular constituents of the central nervous system are the non-neuronal, neuroglial ("nerve glue") cells that
occupy the space between neurons. It has been estimated that there are roughly 360 billion glial cells, which comprise 80-90% of
the cells in the CNS. This section will cover the general classifications of the neuroglial cells and describe some of the general
properties that distinguish neuroglia from neurons.
Neuroglia differ from neurons in several general ways in that they
1. do not form synapses,
2. have essentially only one type of process,
3. retain the ability to divide, and
4. are less electrically excitable than neurons.
Neuroglia are classified based on size and shape fo their neucleus and distinguished from neurons, at the light microscopic level.
Alkaline (basic) dyes are used to show nuclear morphology. In addition, several metal stains are used show the shape of the cell
and cytoplasmic architecture. Characteristics of nuclei, including size, shape, staining intensity, and distribution of chromatin, are
used to distinguish cell types in pathological material. Cell body characteristics, including size, shape, location, branching pattern,
and density of processes, are also used.
Neuroglia are divided into two major categories based on size, the macroglia and the microglia. The macroglia are of ectodermal
origin and consist of astrocytes, oligodendrocytes and ependymal cells. Microglia cells are probably of mesodermal origin. A
comparison of the various neuroglial types is shown in Figure 8.11.
8.13 Macroglia
There are three types of macroglia: Oligodendroglia, Ependyma, and Astrocytes. This section discusses the two types of astrocytes:
Protoplasmic and Fibrous.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter08.html 8/13

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Organization of Cell Types (Section 1, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department …
Click on a glial cell to
move to the related 8.14 Protoplasmic Astrocytes
section.
c2000 UTHSCH
Figure 8.12
View a
protoplasmic
astrocyte.
Protoplasmic astrocytes are found primarily in gray matter. With silver or glial specific stains, their cell bodies and processes are
very irregular. The processes may be large or very fine, sometimes forming sheets that run between axons and dendrites, and may
even surround synapses. These fine sheet-like processes give the protoplasmic astrocyte cell body a "fuzzy" or murky appearance
under the light microscope. Bundles of fine fibrils may be seen within the cytoplasm. The nucleus of a protoplasmic astrocyte is
ellipsoid or bean-shaped with characteristic flecks of chromatin. Specific types of intercellular junctions have been noted between
the processes of protoplasmic astrocytes. These probably mediate ion exchange between cells.
8.15 Fibrous Astrocytes
Fibrous astrocytes are found primarily in white matter, have a smoother cell body contour than do
c2000 UTHSCH
protoplasmic astrocytes as seen with glial-specific stains, and have processes that tend to emerge from the
cell body radially. These processes are narrower and branch to form end feet on blood vessels, ependyma,
and pia. Consequently, the processes of fibrous astrocytes do not form sheets and do not tend to conform
to the shape of the surrounding neurons or vascular elements. The major distinguishing feature of fibrous
astrocytes, as the name suggests, is an abundance of glial fibrils arranged in parallel arrays in the cytoplasm
and extending into the processes.
In Nissl stains, the fibrous astrocytes have a nucleus essentially the same as that of the protoplasmic
type with a flecked appearance. Intercellular adherences have also been observed between fibrous
astrocytes.
Figure 8.13
View a fibrous
astrocyte.
c 2000 UTHSCH
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter08.html 9/13

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Organization of Cell Types (Section 1, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department …
Figure 8.14
Astrocyte with end feed projecting to the surface of neurons,
blood vessels, ependyma and the meninges. No single astrocyte
would project to all of these structures.
Both types of astrocytes function to support the neurons in their immediate vicinity. They provide a physical barrier between cells,
maintain the ionic and pH equilibrium of the extracellular space around neurons, and continually modify the chemical environment
of the neighboring cells. As shown in Figure 8.14, astrocytes form a complete lining around the external surface of the CNS (glial
limitans) and around blood vessels (perivascular feet). During development, they form scaffolding along which nerve cells
migrate to achieve their mature structure. During injury, the astrocytes proliferate and phagocytize dead cells. This often leads to
the formation of glial scar.
In addition to these general functions, astrocytes also act in more specialized ways to facilitate neuron function. They metabolize
neurotransmitters by removing them from the synaptic cleft. For example, the amino acid glutamate is taken up by astrocytes and
inactivated by conversion to glutamine. Glutamine is then transported to the neuron to be re-synthesized into glutamate (see
Chapter 13). More recent evidence indicates that the astrocytes can dramatically change size as part of their physiological
regulation of the neuronal environment. These functions will be discussed in later sections.
8.16 Oligodendroglia
Oligodendrocytes are also located in both gray and white matter. They are the predominant cell type in
white matter where they are often located as rows of cells between groups of neuronal processes. These
are termed interfascicular oligodendroglia and are involved in the formation and maintenance of the
myelin surrounding the neuronal processes nearby. In gray matter, oligodendroglia are usually located
near neurons and, therefore, are known as perineuronal satellite cells. Cell bodies of oligodendroglia
are often located near capillaries, but they lack the definite perivascular end feet characteristic of
astrocytes.
The processes of oligodendrocytes are fewer and more delicate than astrocytes, and the cell body shape
is polygonal to spherical. The oligodendrocyte nucleus is smaller than that of the astrocyte, is
eccentrically located in the cell body, contains clumps of chromatin and can be stained by alkaline dyes.
The cytoplasm of oligodendrocytes tends to be darker than that of astrocytes with silver stains, and does
not contain glial fibrils (although they do contain microtubules).
Click on a glial cell to
move to the related
section.
The role of oligodendroglia in the central nervous system, particularly of the
interfascicular oligodendrocytes, is the formation and maintenance of
myelin. Myelin is the sleeve of membranous material described by Dr. Byrne,
that wraps the neuronal axon as shown in Figure 8.15 to facilitate the
conduction of the action potential through saltatory conduction. Myelin is
composed of concentric layers of membranes compacted against one another
with an internal (i.e. against the nerve fiber) and an external collar of
cytoplasm. As shown in Figure 8.15, a single oligodendrocyte contributes to the
myelination of several adjacent nerve processes. Moreover, more than one
oligodendrocyte contributes to the myelination of a single internode of an
axon. The lamellae of myelin membranes result from the spiral wrapping of the
axon by cytoplasmic processes of interfascicular oligodendroglia. Also, the
oligodendrocyte forming a particular myelin internode (i.e. the myelin
between two nodes) is seldom seen directly adjacent to the myelin-wrapped
process. This is because thin cytoplasmic bridges connect the region of the
oligodendrocyte cell body to the external wrap of myelin. It is important to note
c 2000 UTHSCH PLAY
that the region of the axon exposed at the node of Ranvier is not bare. It may
be the site of branching of the axon, the site of synaptic contacts, or it may be
covered with various glial processes. The axon in the nodal region usually Figure 8.15
contains concentrations of organelles, especially mitochondria. Diagram showing one oligodendrocyte
myelinating several internodal regions.
In the Peripheral Nervous System (PNS), Schwann cells are responsible for
the myelin formation. These cells myelinate axons differently than the View an oligodendrocyte EM.
interfascicular oligodendroglia. As shown in Figure 8.16, they migrate around
the axon, laying a membrane covering around the axon by squeezing out the cytoplasm of the Schwann cell. Also, every internode
of a PNS axon represents a single Schwann cell. In addition unmyelinated axons in the PNS are also enclosed by membranes
formed by Schwann cells.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter08.html 10/13

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Organization of Cell Types (Section 1, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department …
c 2000 UTHSCH
PLAY
Figure 8.16
Diagrammatic representation
of how single Schwann cells
myelinate each internodal
region.
View a Schwann cell EM.
8.17 Ependyma
Ependymal cells are derived from the early germinal epithelium lining the lumen of the neural tube
and thus are also ectodermal derivatives (along with neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes).
Ependymal cells line the ventricles of the brain and the central canal of the spinal cord. They are
arranged in a single-layered columnar epithelium, and have many of the histological characteristics of
simple epithelium, which vary from squamous to cuboidal depending upon their location. The ependyma
forming the ventricular lining do not connect to a basal lamina, but rest directly upon underlying
nervous tissue. As shown in Figure 8.17, the surface facing the ventricle contains many microvilli and
cilia. These cilia move cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in the ventricles. The lateral borders of the
ependymal cells are relatively straight and form junctions with adjacent cells.
Ependymal cells are modified in various regions of the ventricles into layers of cuboidal epithelium, which
do lie on a basement membrane (formed by an outgrowth of the pia) over a rich bed of vasculature and
connective tissue. This is the choroid plexus studied in the Laboratory that is responsible for the
secretion, uptake and transport of substances to and from the CSF.
Click on a glial cell to
move to the related
c 2000 UTHSCH
section.
Figure 8.17
Diagrammatic representation of the arrangement of
ependymal cells to form the ciliated lining of the
ventricles.
View the Ependymal layer.
8.18 Microglia
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter08.html 11/13

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Organization of Cell Types (Section 1, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department …
c2000 UTHSCH
Figure 8.18
View a microglia
cell.
Microglia, in contrast to the other types of glial cells, originate from embryonic mesoderm. They are
present throughout the central nervous system, but tend to be inconspicuous in mature normal tissue
and are difficult to identify with the light or electron microscope. They are more abundant in gray matter,
and may compromise up to 5-10% of the neuroglia in the cerebral cortex.
The general appearance of microglia is similar to oligodendrocytes, although they are smaller and have
undulating processes with spine-like projections. Microglial nuclei are elongated or triangular and stain
deeply with alkaline dyes.
Following damage to nervous tissue, microglia proliferate and migrate to the site of injury where they
clear cellular debris by phagocytosis. The reacting microglia have a swollen form with shortened
processes and are difficult to discriminate from phagocytes from the periphery or migrating perivascular
cells. It is estimated that at least one third of the phagocytes appearing in the area of a lesion are of
Click on a glial cell to CNS origin.
move to the related
section.
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
Which of the following cell types proliferate in the CNS in response to injury? (Note: There is more
than one correct answer.)
A. Neurons
B. Microglia
C. Fibrous astrocytes
D. Protoplasmic astrocytes
E. Macrophages
Question 2 A B C D E
Which of the following cell types is responsible for the maintenance of pH of the extracellular space
of the CNS? (Note: There is more than one correct answer.)
A. Microglia
B. Fibrous astrocytes
C. Protoplasmic astrocytes
D. Ependymal cells
E. Macrophages
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter08.html 12/13

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Organization of Cell Types (Section 1, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department …
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter08.html 13/13



1/7/25, 2:27 AM Synaptic Plasticity (Section 1, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neuro…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 1: Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology
Search
Chapter 7: Synaptic Plasticity
John H. Byrne, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
Revised Summer 2023
7.1 Synaptic Plasticity SSyynnaappttiicc PPllaassttiicciittyy
Historically, it was generally thought that the role of
the synapse was to simply transfer information
between one neuron and another neuron or between
a neuron and a muscle cell. In addition, it was
thought that these connections, once established
during development, were relatively fixed in their
strength, much like a solder joint between two
electronic components. One exciting development in
neurobiology over the past forty years is the
realization that most synapses are extremely plastic;
they are able to change their strength as a result of
either their own activity or through activity in another
pathway. Many think that this synaptic plasticity is
central to understanding the mechanisms of learning
and memory.
Video of lecture
There are two general forms of synaptic plasticity, intrinsic and extrinsic. Intrinsic mechanisms, also known as homosynaptic
mechanisms, refer to changes in the strength of a synapse that are brought about by its own activity. (Homo from the Greek
meaning the same.) Extrinsic plasticity, or heterosynaptic plasticity, is a change in the strength of a synapse brought about
by activity in another pathway.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter07.html 1/6

1/7/25, 2:27 AM Synaptic Plasticity (Section 1, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neuro…
Figure 7.1
Homosynaptic Plasticity. There are two types of intrinsic or homosynaptic plasticity, synaptic depression and synaptic facilitation.
Synaptic depression and facilitation are not always found at the same synapse. Some synapses exhibit one but not the other,
whereas some synapses exhibit both. Figure 7.1B illustrates homosynaptic plasticity at the synapse between a 1A afferent fiber and
a spinal motor neuron. An action potential in the sensory neuron produces an EPSP in the motor neuron. A second action potential
in the sensory neuron, 200 msec after the first, produces an EPSP that is smaller than that produced by the first action potential.
This phenomenon is called synaptic depression. The efficacy of synaptic transmission is not constant; it varies depending upon the
frequency of stimulation. The mechanisms of synaptic depression vary but one common mechanism is depletion of the available
transmitter. The second of two action potentials will release less transmitter because less transmitter is available to be released.
(See Figure 7.2A)
Figure 7.1C illustrates the second form of homosynaptic plasticity, synaptic facilitation. This particular example is known as paired-
pulse or twin-pulse facilitation. Two action potentials in the presynaptic cell produce two EPSPs in the postsynaptic cell. The first
action potential produces a 1 mV EPSP, but the second action potential, which occurs about 20 msec after the first, produces an
EPSP that is larger than the EPSP produced by the first. In this example, it is twice as large as the first one. This doubling of the
EPSP represents the synaptic facilitation. The net EPSP is 3 mV. Through the process of temporal summation the second EPSP (2
mV) adds to the amplitude of the first EPSP (1 mV).
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 7.2
One mechanism contributing to twin pulse facilitation is residual calcium. An action potential leads to the opening of Ca2+ channels
and the influx of Ca2+, which leads to the release of transmitter. Now consider the fate of the calcium after the first action potential
(Figure 7.2B). Ca2+ levels will decline back to their initial level, but this recovery will not occur instantaneously. Thus, if a second
action potential is initiated at a time during which the calcium has not yet recovered to its basal level, the calcium influx associated
with the second spike will add to the "residual calcium" that is left over from the first. The net effect is that the total concentration
of calcium will be greater after the second spike than it was after the first, and more transmitter will be released.
Another intrinsic type of synaptic plasticity is called post-tetanic potentiation (PTP). It is an extreme example of facilitation
defined as a relatively persistent (minutes) enhancement of synaptic strength following a brief train of spikes (a tetanus).
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter07.html 2/6

1/7/25, 2:27 AM Synaptic Plasticity (Section 1, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neuro…
Figure 7.3
7.2 Heterosynaptic Forms of Synaptic Plasticity
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 7.4
Just as there are two types of homosynaptic plasticity, there are two types of heterosynaptic plasticity. Before discussing
heterosynaptic plasticity, it is useful to review the types of synapses that are present in the central nervous system. Three broad
categories of synapses are found in the central nervous system. (See also Chapter 8)
Axosomatic synapses are synapses that are made onto the soma or cell body of a neuron.
Axodendritic synapses, probably the most prominent kind of synapses, are synapses that one neuron makes onto the dendrite of
another neuron.
Axoaxonic synapses are synapses made by one neuron onto the synapse of another neuron. Axoaxonic synapses mediate
presynaptic inhibition and presynaptic facilitation.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter07.html 3/6

1/7/25, 2:27 AM Synaptic Plasticity (Section 1, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neuro…
Figure 7.5
Figure 7.5 illustrates the two major types of heterosynaptic plasticity; presynaptic inhibition and presynaptic facilitation. Presynaptic
inhibition is not an esoteric phenomenon. It is very prominent in the spinal cord and regulates the propagation of information to
higher brain centers. An action potential in the presynaptic cell produces an EPSP in the postsynaptic cell. The modulatory cell (M1)
makes an axoaxonic synapse with the presynaptic cell. After firing cell M1, the EPSP in the postsynaptic cell is smaller. This
phenomenon is called presynaptic inhibition, because cell M1 regulates the ability of the presynaptic cell to release transmitter.
The modulatory transmitter engages metabotropic-type receptors that activate a second messenger system that phosphorylates
Ca2+ channels in such a way that the Ca2+ channels open less readily. Fewer Ca2+ channels are opened with a subsequent action
potential in Pre and therefore the Ca2+ influx (I ) will be reduced. Less Ca2+ influx leads to less transmitter release and a smaller
Ca
EPSP.
The phenomenon complementary to presynaptic inhibition is presynaptic facilitation. M1 is capable of increasing the strength of
the synaptic pathway. As a result of the activation of a second messenger cascade by M1, an action potential in the presynaptic
terminal leads to a greater amount of Ca2+ influx, and therefore more transmitter is released.
7.3 Long-Term Potentiation (LTP)
A very enduring form of synaptic plasticity is called long-term potentiation (LTP). It can have both homosynaptic and heterosynaptic
components. An electric shock (test stimulus) to afferent fibers produces an EPSP (Figure 7.6). If the pathway is repeatedly
stimulated (e.g., every minute), the amplitude of EPSP is constant. A tetanus produces post-tetanic potentiation (PTP) that dies
away after several minutes. What is left is a very enduring enhancement of the EPSP. There is excitement about LTP because it is
the kind of mechanism necessary to store memory (Figure 7.7).
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter07.html 4/6

1/7/25, 2:27 AM Synaptic Plasticity (Section 1, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neuro…
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 7.6 Figure 7.7
Figure 7.8
The NMDA-type receptor is critical for some forms of LTP, in particular LTP at the CA3-CA1 synapse in the hippocampus. The
postsynaptic spines of CA1 neurons have two types of glutamate receptors; NMDA-type glutamate receptors and the AMPA-type
glutamate receptors (Figure 7.8). Both receptors are permeable to Na+ and K+, but the NMDA-type has two additional features.
First, in addition to being permeable to Na+, it also has a significant permeability to Ca2+.
Second, this channel is normally blocked by Mg2+.
Even if glutamate binds to the channel and produces a conformational change, there is no efflux of K+ or influx of Na+ or Ca2+
because it is "plugged up" by the Mg2+ (Figure 7.8A). Thus, a weak test stimulus will not open this channel because it is blocked by
Mg2. A weak test stimulus will produce an EPSP, but that EPSP will be mediated by the AMPA receptor.
Now consider the consequences of a tetanus (Figure 7.8B). Because of the tetanus, there will be spatial and temporal summation of
the EPSPs produced by the multiple afferent synapses on the common postsynaptic cell (Figure 7.6). Consequently, the membrane
potential of the postsynaptic neuron will become very depolarized. Because the inside of the cell becomes positive, the positively
charged Mg2+ is "thrust" out of the channel (Figure 7.8B). Ca2+ then enters the spine through the NMDA receptor. That Ca2+
activates various protein kinases, which then trigger long-term changes in synaptic strength. One of the long-term changes
involves the insertion of additional AMPA receptors (Figure 7.8C). Consequently, the glutamate released by a test stimulus after a
LTP-inducing tetanus will open a greater number of channels and thereby produce a larger (potentiated) EPSP (Figure 7.8C). In
addition to an increase in the number of postsynaptic AMPA receptors, there is evidence that a greater amount of transmitter is
released from the presynaptic neurons. The combination of the presynaptic and postsynaptic effects would act synergistically to
increase the size of the synaptic potential in the postsynaptic neuron.
7.4 Summary
A given postsynaptic neuron receives synaptic input from a number of different sources. There are the traditional type of
axosomatic and axodendritic synapses. These can be either excitatory or inhibitory. In addition, the synaptic responses can be
mediated by both ionotropic and metabotropic receptors. The presynaptic cells can be modulated through presynaptic inhibition and
presynaptic facilitation. Consider that any one postsynaptic cell makes and receives 10,000 connections with other cells and that
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter07.html 5/6

1/7/25, 2:27 AM Synaptic Plasticity (Section 1, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neuro…
this module can be recapitulated in each of the billions of cells in the nervous system.
It is this enormous pattern of synaptic connections and the plasticity that occurs at
each one of these synapses which makes the nervous system so extraordinary.
It is very difficult to overestimate the importance of synaptic transmission. It is critical
to the basic functioning of the nervous system and appears to be critical in learning
and memory. Also, changes in synaptic transmission seem to be central to
understanding a number of neurological disorders such as myasthenia gravis and
Parkinson's disease. Synaptic transmission is central to understanding mental diseases
such as schizophrenia, anxiety, and depression. A major theme of neuroscience is to
identify the specific transmitter systems involved in these brain diseases and design
appropriate interventions. Finally, most of the psychoactive drugs function by affecting
some aspects of synaptic transmission.
Figure 7.9
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter07.html 6/6



1/7/25, 2:27 AM Synaptic Transmission in the Central Nervous System (Section 1, Chapter 6) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the N…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 1: Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology
Search
Chapter 6: Synaptic Transmission in the Central Nervous System
John H. Byrne, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
Revised Summer 2023
6.1 Synaptic Transmission in a Simple Reflex SSyynnaappttiicc TTrraannssmmiissssiioonn aanndd tthhee CCeennttrraall NN……
Circuit
One of the simplest behaviors mediated by the central nervous system
is knee-jerk or stretch reflex. In response to a neurologist's hammer to
the patella tendon, there is a reflex extension of the leg. Figure 6.1
illustrates the neurocircuitry that controls that reflex response. The
stretch to the patella tendon stretches the extensor muscle. More
specifically, it stretches a group of specific receptors known as muscle
spindle receptors or simply stretch receptors.
SN
Afferent Fiber
Video of lecture
Interneuron
Extensor E Neuron
Muscle
F Neuron
Flexor
Muscle
c 2000 UTHSCH
S.Littlejohn
Figure 6.1
The stretch elicits action potentials in the stretch receptors which then propagate over type 1A afferent fibers, the somata of which
are located in the dorsal root ganglion. Processes of these sensory neurons then enter the spinal cord and make synaptic
connections with two types of cells. First, a synaptic connection is formed with the extensor motor neuron located in the ventral
horn of the spinal cord. As the result of synaptic activation of this motor neuron, action potentials are elicited in the motor neuron
and propagate out the ventral roots, ultimately invading the terminal regions of the motor axon (i.e., the neuromuscular
junction), causing release of acetylcholine, depolarization of the muscle cell, formation of an action potential in the muscle cell,
and a subsequent contraction of the muscle.
The sensory neurons also make synaptic connections with another type of neuron in the spinal cord called an interneuron.
Interneurons are so named because they are interposed between one type of neuron and another. The particular interneuron shown
is an inhibitory interneuron. As a result of its activation through the process of synaptic transmission, action potentials are elicited
in the interneuron. An action potential in the inhibitory neuron leads to the release of a chemical transmitter substance that inhibits
the flexor motor neuron, thereby preventing an improper movement from occurring. This particular reflex is known as the
monosynaptic stretch reflex because this reflex is mediated by a single excitatory synaptic relay in the central nervous system.
6.2 Ionic Mechanisms of EPSPs
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter06.html 1/6

1/7/25, 2:27 AM Synaptic Transmission in the Central Nervous System (Section 1, Chapter 6) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the N…
Synaptic Potentials
Figure 6.2
The figure at right illustrates how it is possible to experimentally examine some of the components of synaptic transmission in the
reflex pathway that mediates the stretch reflex. Normally, the sensory neuron is activated by a stretch to the stretch receptor, but
this process can be bypassed by injecting a depolarizing current into the sensory neuron. That stimulus initiates an action potential
in the sensory neuron which leads to a change in the potential of the motor neuron. This potential is known as an excitatory
postsynaptic potential (EPSP); excitatory because it tends to depolarize the cell, thereby tending to increase the probability of
firing an action potential in the motor neuron and postsynaptic because it is a potential recorded on the postsynaptic side of the
synapse.
The ionic mechanisms for the EPSP in the spinal motor neuron are essentially identical to the ionic mechanisms for the EPSP at the
neuromuscular junction. Specifically, the transmitter substance diffuses across the synaptic cleft and binds to specific ionotropic
receptors on the postsynaptic membrane, leading to a simultaneous increase in the sodium and potassium permeability (See Figure
4.10). The mechanisms for release are also identical to those at the neuromuscular junction. An action potential in the presynaptic
terminal leads to the opening of voltage dependent Ca2+ channels, and the Ca2+ influx causes transmitter substance to be
released.
6.3 Differences between the EPSP at the Skeletal Neuromuscular Junction and
EPSPs in the CNS
There are two fundamental differences between the process of synaptic transmission at the sensorimotor synapse in the spinal cord
and the process of synaptic transmission at the neuromuscular junction. First, transmitter substance released by the sensory
neuron is not ACh but rather the amino acid glutamate. Indeed, there are many different transmitters in the central nervous system
- up to 50 or more and the list grows every year. Fortunately, these 50 or more transmitter substances can be conveniently grouped
into four basic categories: acetylcholine, monoamines, peptides, and the amino acids. Second, in contrast to the 50-mV
amplitude of the synaptic potential at the neuromuscular junction, the amplitude of the synaptic potential in a spinal motor neuron,
as a result of an action potential in a 1A afferent fiber, is only about 1 mV.
6.4 Temporal and Spatial Summation
If the amplitude of the postsynaptic potential is only 1 mV, how can an action potential in the motor neuron be triggered and the
reflex function? Note that a 1-mV EPSP is unlikely to be sufficient to drive the membrane potential of the motor neuron to threshold
to fire a spike. If there is no spike, there will be no contraction of the muscle. The answer is that the stretch of the muscle fires
multiple action potentials in many different stretch receptors. In fact, the greater the stretch, the greater is the probability of
activating more stretch receptors. This process is referred to as recruitment. Therefore, multiple 1A afferents will converge onto
the spinal motor neuron and participate in its activation. This is not the whole answer, however. Recall that the greater the intensity
of the stimulus, the greater is the number of action potentials elicited in a sensory receptor. The greater the stretch, the greater the
number of action potentials elicited in a single sensory neuron and the greater number of EPSPs produced in the motor neuron from
that train of action potentials in the sensory cell. The processes by which the multiple EPSPs from presynaptic neurons summate
over space and time are called temporal and spatial summation.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter06.html 2/6

1/7/25, 2:27 AM Synaptic Transmission in the Central Nervous System (Section 1, Chapter 6) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the N…
Figure 6.3
Temporal summation. A single action potential in sensory neuron 1 produces a 1-mV EPSP in the motor neuron. Now consider the
consequences of firing two action potentials in quick succession (See figure above). Two EPPs are elicited, the second of which
summates on the falling edge of the first. As a result of two action potentials, a summated potential about 2 mV in amplitude
occurs. If there were three presynaptic action potentials, and they occurred rapidly enough, the total potential would be about 3
mV, and so forth. Temporal summation is strictly a passive property of nerve cells. Special ionic conductive mechanisms are not
needed to explain it. The potentials summate because of the passive properties of the nerve cell membrane, specifically the ability
of membranes to store charge. The membrane temporarily stores the charge of the first PSP and then the charge from the second
PSP is added to it to produce a potential twice as large at first. This process of temporal summation is very much dependent upon
the duration of the synaptic potential. The temporal summation occurs when the presynaptic action potentials occur in quick
succession. The time frame is dependent upon the passive properties of the membrane, specifically the time constant.
Spatial summation. Now consider a motor neuron that receives two inputs. An action potential produced in sensory neuron 1
produces a 1-mV EPSP and a single action potential in sensory neuron 2 also produces a 1-mV EPSP. If action potentials are
produced simultaneously in sensory neuron 1 and in sensory neuron 2, the EPSPs summate to produce a summated EPSP which is
twice that of the individual EPSPs. Spatial summation in nerve cells occurs because of the space constant, the ability of a charge
produced in one region of the cell to spread to other regions of the cell.
6.5 IPSPs
Whether a neuron fires in response to a synaptic input is dependent upon how many action potentials are being fired in any one
afferent input, as well as how many individual afferent pathways are activated.
The decision to fire also depends on the presence of inhibitory synaptic inputs. Artificially depolarizing the interneuron to initiate an
action potential produces a transient hyperpolarization of the membrane potential of the motor neuron (See Figure 6.2). The time
course of this hyperpolarization looks very similar to that of an EPSP, but it is reversed in sign. The synaptic potential in the motor
neuron is called an inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP) because it tends to move the membrane potential away from the
threshold, thereby decreasing the probability of this neuron initiating an action potential.
6.6 Ionic Mechanisms for IPSPs
The membrane potential of the flexor motor neuron is about -65 mV, so one might predict that the IPSP would be due to an
increase in the permeability or the conductance of an ion whose equilibrium potential is more negative than -65 mV. One possibility
is potassium. Potassium does mediate some inhibitory synaptic potentials in the central nervous system, but not at the particular
synapse between a spinal interneuron and spinal motor neuron. At this particular synapse, the IPSP is due to a selective increase in
chloride permeability. Note that the equilibrium potential for chloride is about -70 mV. The transmitter released by the spinal
interneuron binds to a special class of ionotropic receptors which are normally closed, but open and become selectively permeable
to chloride ions as a result of the binding of the transmitter. As a result of the increase in Cl- permeability, the membrane potential
moves from its resting value of -65 mV towards the Cl- equilibrium potential. (Note that in principle, decreasing the resting
conductance of Na+ could also produce an IPSP.)
6.7 Transmitter Substance of the Spinal Inhibitory Neuron
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter06.html 3/6

1/7/25, 2:27 AM Synaptic Transmission in the Central Nervous System (Section 1, Chapter 6) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the N…
What about the transmitter substance that is released by the inhibitory interneuron in the spinal cord? The transmitter substance is
glycine, an amino acid which is used frequently in the central nervous system as a transmitter that produces inhibitory actions. It
is not the most common, however. The most common transmitter with inhibitory actions is gamma amino butyric acid (GABA).
6.8 Metabotropic Synaptic Responses
In addition to the responses mediated by ionotropic receptors, there is an entirely separate class of synaptic potentials that have
durations with orders of magnitude greater than the durations of the classical EPSPs. These are so-called slow synaptic potentials
and they are mediated by metabotropic receptors. Slow synaptic potentials are not observed at every postsynaptic neuron but they
are certainly observed at many. The figure below illustrates a postsynaptic neuron which receives two inputs. An action potential in
neuron 1 produces an excitatory postsynaptic potential or EPSP in the postsynaptic cell whose duration is about 20 msec. Neuron 2
can also produce a postsynaptic potential but its duration is more than three orders of magnitude longer than that of the
conventional type of synaptic potential. The mechanism of these slow synaptic responses involves changes in metabolism of the
cell.
Figure 6.4
c 2000 UTHSCH One mechanism for a slow synaptic potential is shown in the illustration at left (Figure
6.5) and in Figure 11.11. In contrast to the ionotropic receptor for which the receptors
are actually part of the channel complex, the channels that produce the slow synaptic
potentials are not directly coupled to the transmitter receptors. Rather, the receptors
are separate from the channel. These receptors are known as metabotropic because
they involve changes in the metabolism of the cell and, in general, changes in
activation of specific second messenger systems. The figure at left illustrates an
example of one type of response that involves the cyclic AMP cascade. Slow PSPs are
in some cases mediated by cyclic AMP but they are also mediated by other protein
kinases. For the response in Figure 6.5, the transmitter activates G proteins that lead
to the increased synthesis of cyclic AMP. Cyclic AMP then leads to the activation of
cyclic AMP-dependent kinase (PKA), which phosphorylates a channel protein or a
component of the channel and then produces a conformational change in the channel
and a change in its ionic permeability. In contrast to a direct conformational change
produced by the binding of a transmitter to the receptor channel complex (seen in
responses mediated by ionotropic receptors), the conformational change is produced
by phosphorylation. The particular channel is one that is selectively permeable to K+
and is normally open. As a result of the channel phosphorylation by PKA, the channel
closes and becomes less permeable to K+. Since the normal resting potential is due to
a balance of Na+ and K+, decreasing the K+ conductance favors the effects of the Na+
Figure 6.5
conductance and a depolarization is produced.
It is interesting to point out that the activation of metabotropic receptors can produce
effects which are much longer than several hundred seconds. For example, protein kinase A can diffuse in the nucleus where it can
phosphorylate proteins (i.e., transcription factors) that regulate gene expression.
6.9 Types of Synaptic Transmission
This chapter and the two previous ones have focused on chemical synaptic transmission. As you have seen for chemical synapses,
there is a distinct cytoplasmic discontinuity that separates the presynaptic and postsynaptic membranes (Fig. 6.6A).
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter06.html 4/6

1/7/25, 2:27 AM Synaptic Transmission in the Central Nervous System (Section 1, Chapter 6) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the N…
Figure 6.6A
Figure 6.6B
This discontinuity is known as the synaptic cleft. The presynaptic terminal of chemical synapses contains a high concentration of
mitochondria and synaptic vesicles, and there is a characteristic thickening of the postsynaptic membrane. As a result of a
depolarization or an action potential in the presynaptic terminal, chemical transmitters are released from the presynaptic terminal,
which diffuse across the synaptic cleft and bind to receptor sites on the postsynaptic membrane. This leads to a permeability
change that produces the postsynaptic potential. For chemical synapses, there is a delay (usually, approximately 0.5-1 ms in
duration) between the initiation of an action potential in the presynaptic terminal and a potential change in the postsynaptic cell.
The synaptic delay is due to the time necessary for transmitter to be released, diffuse across the cleft, and bind with receptors on
the postsynaptic membrane. Chemical synaptic transmission is generally unidirectional. A potential change in the presynaptic cell
releases transmitter that produces a postsynaptic potential, but a depolarization in the postsynaptic cell does not produce any
effects in the presynaptic cell because no transmitter is released from the postsynaptic cell at the synaptic region. The most
predominant type of synapse is the chemical synapse, and for that reason they have been the focus of this and the previous
chapters.
However, another category of synapses are those associated with electrical synaptic transmission. Electrical synaptic transmission is
mediated by specialized structures known as gap junctions (Fig. 6.6B), which provide a pathway for cytoplasmic continuity between
the presynaptic and the postsynaptic cells. Consequently, a depolarization (or a hyperpolarization) produced in the presynaptic
terminal produces a change in potential of the postsynaptic terminal, which is due to the direct ionic pathway between the cells. For
electrical synapses, a minimal synaptic delay is present; as soon as a potential change is produced in the presynaptic terminal, a
reflection of that potential change is produced in the postsynaptic cell. Electrical junctions are found in both the nervous system and
between other excitable membranes, such as smooth muscle and cardiac muscle cells. In these muscle cells, they provide an
important pathway for the propagation of action potentials from one muscle cell to another.
6.10 Neurotoxins
The discovery of certain toxins has greatly facilitated the analysis of voltage and chemically gated channels as well as the process of
synaptic transmission. The following table illustrates some that have been particularly useful.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter06.html 5/6

1/7/25, 2:27 AM Synaptic Transmission in the Central Nervous System (Section 1, Chapter 6) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the N…
Some Important Neurotoxins
Fish toxin that blocks the pore of voltage-dependent Na+
tetrodotoxin (TTX)
channels.
μ-conotoxin (μ-CTX) Fish-hunting cone snail toxin with properties similar to TTX.
Toxin from marine dinoflagellates with properties similar to TTX.
saxitoxin (STX)
STX is also known as paralytic shellfish poison.
Fish-hunting cone snail toxin that blocks certain types of voltage-
ω-conotoxin (ω-CTX)
dependent Ca2+ channels.
funnel web spider toxin Toxin from funnel web spider which blocks certain types of
(ω-Aga) voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels.
Bee venom toxin that blocks certain types of Ca2+-activated K+
apamin
channels.
Scorpion venom toxin that blocks pore of some Ca2+-activated
charybdotoxin (ChTX)
K+ channels and voltage-dependent K+ channels.
Plant toxin that is a competitive inhibitor of nicotinic ACh
curare (d-tubocuraine)
receptors.
Snake toxin that is competitive and highly irreversible inhibitor of
α-bungarotoxin
nicotinic ACh receptors.
GABA receptor blocker isolated from the seed of Anamirta
picrotoxin A
cocculus.
Glycine receptor blocker isolated from the seed of the East
strychnine
Indian tree Strychnos nux-vomica.
Clostridial neurotoxin with zinc-dependent protease activity;
tetanus toxin Cleaves synaptic vesicle proteins in the CNS and thereby blocks
release of neurotransmitters.
Clostridial neurotoxin with zinc-dependent protease activity;
botulinum toxin Cleaves synaptic vesicle proteins at the neuromuscular junction
and thereby blocks release of ACh.
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter06.html 6/6



1/7/25, 2:27 AM Mechanisms of Neurotransmitter Release (Section 1, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 1: Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology
Search
Chapter 5: Mechanisms of Neurotransmitter Release
John H. Byrne, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
Revised Summer 2023
5.1 Role of Calcium in Transmitter Release
Calcium is a key ion involved in the release of chemical transmitter substances. Bernard Katz and his colleagues examined its role
using the skeletal nerve muscle synapse. Electrodes were placed near the presynaptic terminal to initiate an action potential in the
terminal (Figure 5.1). The preparation was perfused with a solution free of calcium. In order to precisely control the delivery of
calcium, another microelectrode was filled with calcium. Since Ca2+ is positively charged, it can be delivered to the vicinity of the
synaptic terminal by briefly closing a switch connected to a battery in such a way that the positive pole forces minute amounts of
calcium out of the electrode. In the absence of Ca2+ ejection, stimulation of the motor neuron produced no EPSP.
Figure 5.1
Tap here to see a series of related graphics
Just before the presynaptic axon was stimulated a second time, the switch was briefly closed to eject a small amount of calcium in
the vicinity of the presynaptic terminal. A normal EPSP was recorded. The experiment was repeated a third time, but now the
calcium ejection occurred after the presynaptic axon was stimulated. There was no EPSP. This experiment demonstrates that
calcium must be present before or during the action potential in the presynaptic terminal. Based on this experiment and others like
it, Katz and colleagues proposed the calcium hypothesis for chemical synaptic transmission.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter05.html 1/6

1/7/25, 2:27 AM Mechanisms of Neurotransmitter Release (Section 1, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences…
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 5.2
The figure above illustrates some of the key features of the calcium hypothesis for chemical synaptic transmission at the
neuromuscular junction, but this hypothesis is generally applicable to all chemical synapses in the nervous system. There are two
parts to this hypothesis. First, the depolarization of the presynaptic terminal leads to an increase in Ca2+ permeability. Just as there
are voltage-dependent Na+ and K+ channels, there are also voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels. The structure of the voltage-
dependent channels is very similar to the structure of the voltage-dependent sodium channels. Indeed, just a few amino acids can
make the difference between a channel being selectively permeable to calcium and one that is selectively permeable to sodium. The
Ca2+ channel is normally closed, but if there is a depolarization of the membrane (caused by a presynaptic action potential), the
channel opens and the opening of the channel allows calcium influx. The second part of the calcium hypothesis for chemical
synaptic transmission involves the consequences of the Ca2+ influx. The opening of the Ca2+ channel allows for calcium to flow
down its concentration gradient from the outside to the inside of the synaptic terminal. This influx leads to an increase in the
concentration of the Ca2+ in the presynaptic terminal, which by interacting with proteins associated with synaptic vesicles leads to
the release of the chemical transmitter substance.
5.2 Calcium Hypotheses for Chemical Synaptic Transmission
Quantal Nature of Transmitter Release
Figure 5.3 A
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter05.html 2/6

1/7/25, 2:27 AM Mechanisms of Neurotransmitter Release (Section 1, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences…
Figure 5.3 B
How does the increase in the intracellular concentration of Ca2+ cause transmitter release? The answer to this question came from
an experiment which initially seems unrelated to the issue. Using high amplification of the electrical recording system, Katz noticed
small deflections that occurred spontaneously and randomly at a rate of about once every 50 msec (Panel A of the figure to the
right).
These small deflections had interesting properties.
First, they occurred in the absence of any stimulus. (Figure 5.3 A)
Second, they were small with an average amplitude of about 0.5 mV. The distribution could be fit by a single gaussian
function, indicating that the events arose from a common underlying process. (Figure 5.3 A)
Third, these events could only be recorded in the vicinity of the synaptic junction.
Fourth, they were blocked by curare. (Figure 5.3 A)
Fifth, they were enhanced by neostigmine. (Figure 5.3 A)
Sixth, their frequency was sensitive to basal levels of intracellular Ca2+ (Figure 5.3 B)
Based on these considerations, Katz called these events miniature endplate potentials or MEPPs. They appeared very similar to
endplate potentials, but they were only about 0.5 mV in amplitude compared to the 50 mV amplitude of the normal EPP. Katz
suggested that MEPPs were due to the spontaneous and random release of ACh. This idea intuitively makes good sense. If there is
an abundance of ACh in the presynaptic terminal, perhaps some will leak out and diffuse across the cleft, bind to ACh receptors,
and produce a small potential change. ACh is likely to be spontaneously released occasionally because there is a basal level of
calcium in the presynaptic terminal. Each vesicle actually contains enough transmitter to open about 1,000 individual ACh-sensitive
channels. Therefore, because the MEPP is about 0.5 mV in amplitude, the opening of a single channel produces a potential of about
0.5 μV.
(The designation MEPP has a very specific meaning. It refers to those small endplate potentials that occur randomly in the absence
of any stimulation. For example, small endplate potentials (EPPs) can be recorded in the presence of curare or low levels of
extracellular Ca2+ , but they are not MEPPs.)
Katz suggested, as a result of the experiment illustrated in Figure 5.3, that the normal EPP is due to the summation effects of many
vesicles being released at the same time. One vesicle produces a potential of about 0.5 mV. The release of 100 of those vesicles at
the same time could produce a potential which is 100 times as great (50 mV).
The illustration below (Figure 5.4) shows one of these vesicles in the process of fusing with the membrane and releasing its
contents into the synaptic cleft through a process called exocytosis. For illustrative purposes, each synaptic vesicle is shown to
contain three molecules of transmitter. In reality, each vesicle contains about 10,000 molecules of transmitter. Vesicles ready to be
released are found in a region near the presynaptic terminal membrane called the readily releaseable pool. Newly synthesized
vesicles are found in the storage or reserve pool. The process by which a vesicle migrates from the reserve pool to the readily
releaseable pool is called mobilization. After fusing with the membrane and releasing its contents, the membrane is recycled to
form new synaptic vesicles. This process is called recycling. Additional details of this process are found in Chapter 10.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter05.html 3/6

1/7/25, 2:27 AM Mechanisms of Neurotransmitter Release (Section 1, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences…
Synaptic Vesicle Cycling
PLAY
Neurotransmitter
Synaptic Vesicle
Reserve
Pool
Presynaptic
Terminal
Readily
Releasable
Pool
Postsynaptic
c 2000 UTHSCH Terminal
Figure 5.4
Figure 5.5
An experiment by Katz that further supported the quantal hypothesis for chemical synaptic transmission is shown above. The
extracellular concentration of calcium was lowered to reduce the size of the evoked endplate potential. Because less Ca2+ is in the
extracellular medium, less Ca2+ will be available to enter through the voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels. At the arrow, the electrical
shock was delivered to the motor axon. Eight successive stimuli were delivered to the presynaptic terminal. EPSPs with stars are
the miniature endplate potentials (MEPPs). Note that they are uncorrelated with the stimulus. The evoked endplate potentials are
small and highly variable. Sometimes the EPP was 1.6 mV in amplitude; sometimes there was no EPP at all. Sometimes the EPP
was 0.4 mV. Katz noticed that these amplitudes showed a specific kind of distribution. The smallest evoked responses were 0.4 mV.
He called these responses "units". Other times he recorded EPPs that were about 0.8 mV and called such responses "doubles"
because they were twice the unit, and sometimes responses were 1.6 mV. Figure 5.5 is a plot of the number of times an EPP of
various amplitudes was observed. Katz noticed that the amplitude of the smallest EPP that could be evoked was the same
amplitude (0.5 mV) as the amplitude of the MEPP.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter05.html 4/6

1/7/25, 2:27 AM Mechanisms of Neurotransmitter Release (Section 1, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences…
Based on these results Katz proposed the quantal hypothesis for chemical synaptic transmission. An action potential in the
presynaptic cell produces an influx of Ca2+which promotes the exocytosis of synaptic vesicles from the presynaptic terminal. There
is a statistical variability in the amount of vesicles that can be released. When the extracellular calcium concentration is low,
sometimes there is not enough calcium to release any vesicles. At other times, there is enough calcium to cause the release of one
vesicle and other times two vesicles, or three vesicles, and so forth. Each peak is therefore an integral multiple of the next,
indicating that these vesicles are released in a quantized fashion. With normal levels of calcium, there is sufficient influx of Ca2+to
release about 100 vesicles, which produce an endplate potential (EPP) of about 50 mV.
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 5.6
Summary of the steps involved in the process of synaptic
transmission at the neuromuscular junction.
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
In a normal, healthy individual the number of ACh-sensitive channels in a skeletal muscle cell opened
as a result of a single action potential in a motor axon would be approximately.
A. 1
B. 100
C. 10,000
D. 100,000
E. 10,000,000
Question 2 A B C D
An isolated nerve muscle preparation treated with a moderate dose of curare would be associated
with a decrease in the (NOTE: there is more than one correct anwer.)
A. Frequency of MEPPs
B. Amplitude of MEPPs
C. Release of transmitter from the terminal of the motor axon triggered by a presynaptic
action potential
D. Amplitude of the EPP
Question 3 A B C D
An isolated nerve muscle preparation exposed to a low concentration of extracellular Ca2+ would be
associated with a decrease in the (NOTE: there is more than one correct answer.)
A. Amplitude of the EPP
B. Release of transmitter from the terminal of the motor axon triggered by a presynaptic
action potential
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter05.html 5/6

1/7/25, 2:27 AM Mechanisms of Neurotransmitter Release (Section 1, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences…
C. Influx of Ca2+ into the presynaptic terminal
D. Amplitude of MEPPs
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter05.html 6/6



Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Austin Lim, PhD (DePaul University)
Editor: Monica Javidnia, PhD (University of Rochester)
Previously, we described the electrical differences between synapses.
properties of a single neuron. A lone neuron A lone neuron can send action potentials
can send action potentials as a means of as a means of communication, but cells become
communication, but cells become much more much more interesting when they have partners to
interesting when they have partners to talk to. talk to. The nervous system of the worm C. elegans
The nervous system of the worm C. elegans is is only 300 neurons, and yet it is complex enough
only 300 neurons, and yet it is complex enough to engage in moderately intricate behaviors like
to engage in moderately intricate behaviors like responding to repellant or attractant odors, social
responding to repellant or attractant odors, social feeding, and long-term learning. The human brain,
feeding, and long-term learning. The human brain, with its 86 billion neurons, can engage in these
with its 86 billion neurons, can engage in these behaviors and so many more - only because of
behaviors and so many more - only because of communication between the different neurons in
communication between the different neurons in the brain.
the brain. In this chapter, we will focus on the
In this chapter, we will focus on the molecular-level features of communication
molecular-level features of communication between neurons, starting from the anatomical
between neurons, starting from the anatomical differences between synapses.
Chapter 5 outline
5.1 Electrical vs. chemical synapses
5.2 Properties of vesicles
5.3 Receptors
5.4 Neurotransmitters
5.1 Electrical vs. chemical synapses
The synapse is not a part of the structure Electrical synapses
of a neuron, but rather the site of close proximity Electrical synapses are the simpler of
between two communicating neurons. There the two types of synapses. In an electrical
are two main types of synapses: electrical and synapse, the main driver of communication
chemical. between two neurons is a change in potential,
and the carrier of charge is almost always an
5-2
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Connexon
Connexin monomer
Cell membrane
Extracellular space
Channel
Figure 5.1 An electrical synapse exists between two closely-connected neurons. Cytoplasm passes
between the two neurons through a protein complex called a connexon.
ion. The electrical synapse simply means that interact closely with each other and form the gap
the cells share their cytoplasm with an adjacent junction, which is the structure that connects
cell. Electrical synapses are what Camillo Golgi neurons electrically.
imagined when he proposed the reticular theory Neurons that are connected by electrical
of nervous system organization. Oftentimes an synapses are remarkably close to each other.
entire network of many hundreds of neurons is The synaptic gap between the two electrically
connected by these synapses. connected neurons is about 3.5 nanometers.
Imagine two neurons that are connected by Logically, the neurons must be close since the
an electrical synapse. First of all, both of them are hemichannels are like a physical “bridge” between
complete cells on their own. Each one contains the two cells.
a complete plasma membrane surrounding
the neuron, a nucleus, and all the individual
organelles needed to carry out that cell’s basic
life processes. Electrical synapses share the
cytoplasm between the two connected cells, so
ions, ATP, and larger signaling molecules and
proteins are able to move between the two cells.
For this to happen, there exists a specialized
physical channel between the two that allows for
the passage of cytoplasm called a connexon
or hemichannel. Each hemichannel itself is
made up of six transmembrane proteins called
connexins (you can remember the difference
Figure 5.2 Electrical synapses are similar to a
between the channel and the individual protein
skybridge that physically connects the cytoplasm
because proteins often end with the letters -in).
between two neurons.
When two connexons contact each other, they
5-3
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Electrical synapses are capable of
Clinical connection
passing information bidirectionally. This means
Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease
that a signal does not always move sequentially
Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease is a rare
from the presynaptic cell to the postsynaptic
genetic disorder that damages parts of the
cell. Rather, ions and signaling molecules are
peripheral nervous system including the motor
free to move through the connexons in either
nerves, resulting in muscle weakness and
direction. Also, each cell within an electrically-
difficulty with walking, and the sensory nerves,
coupled network can receive inputs at any
causing some to experience abnormal sensations
of the cells, making it able to detect several
such as tingling or pain in their extremities.
signals at once - the same way a huge satellite
These symptoms are characteristic of signal
dish can detect more signals than a small dish.
transduction failure resulting from deficits in
Electrical synapses likely evolved
myelin. One type of connexin protein, called
because of evolutionary pressures that
Cx32, is heavily expressed in Schwann cells, the
selected for speed. These synapses can pass
glia that produce myelin in the PNS. Mutations in
signals as fast as electrical charges can move
the gene that codes for Cx32 are associated with
through an electrolyte-rich fluid like cytoplasm,
the X-linked form of CMT disease, and knocking-
which is almost instantaneous. Therefore, an
out the gene in experimental mice cause the mice
escape reflex that is made up of communication
to express similar symptoms as human CMT.
across electrical synapses is advantageous
for animals that need to escape predators. For
example, crayfish exhibit a reflexive abdominal
flexion response when exposed to threatening
stimuli, causing the animal’s body to dart away
from a threat within a fraction of a millisecond.
Comparing across the phylogenetic tree,
electrical synapses are often found in less
complex organisms, including arthropods
such as insects and crustaceans, where such
reflexes are likely more critical for survival.
Figure 5.3 People with CMT disease often have
Another advantage of electrical
abnormally shaped feet.
synapses is that they can form a large network
of interconnected neurons with synchronized
activity. For example, neuroendocrine cells in connecting inhibitory interneurons allows the
the hypothalamus are connected by electrical network to send an immediate “shut-down” signal
synapses. When the “go” signal arrives, all under specific circumstances.
the cells depolarize at once, which can result
in the massive release of hormones into the Chemical synapses
bloodstream. A network can also cause sudden, At a chemical synapse, a signaling
powerful inhibition. Like an angry mob of people molecule is released by the presynaptic cell to
chanting, a network of electrical synapses influence the postsynaptic cell. These signaling
5-4
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Presynaptic Motor
neuron neuron
Synaptic
vesicle Synaptic
vesicle
Receptor
Muscle
Chemical
synapse
Receptor
Postsynaptic
neuron
Figure 5.4 Chemical synapses are the site of close interaction between two neurons (left) or a motor
neuron and a muscle fiber, which is called the neuromuscular junction (right).
molecules, generally called neurotransmitters, Because of the complexity of the signals
are synthesized or stored by neurons. After that chemical synapses can convey, evolutionary
being released, these neurotransmitters diffuse development through time has allowed for a
randomly across the synapse, where they are tremendous variety of responses. Chemical
able to affect nearby neurons once the chemical synapses allow for fine-tuning of neural networks,
binds to its corresponding receptor. giving these nervous systems a larger range of
Since chemical synapses do not rely on a possibilities. The nervous systems of “higher”
direct physical protein “tunnel” to connect the two organisms like humans tend to have several
neurons, the distance between the two cells can chemical synapses since these signals are likely
be much larger. On average, a chemical synapse necessary for complex behaviors and cognition.
is a distance of about 20-40 nanometers, roughly Many chemical synapses exist between
a thousand times smaller than the diameter of a the axon of one neuron and the dendrite of
human hair. another neuron. One specific type of chemical
A chemical synapse can pass a variety synapse refers to the space between a motor
of signals, depending on the neurotransmitter neuron and muscle tissue, and this is called the
and the receptor. For example, some signals neuromuscular junction, or NMJ. When the
are directly excitatory and allow positively chemical signaling molecule acetylcholine (ACh)
charged cations to enter the neuron causing is released by the presynaptic motor neuron, it is
depolarization. Other signals are hyperpolarizing, detected by receptors that are expressed on the
and therefore inhibitory. And yet other signals are muscle. The release of ACh causes contraction
much more complex, inducing changes in protein of the muscle.
expression that can modify cellular excitability
over the course of minutes or hours.
5-5
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

5.2 Properties of vesicles
Types of vesicles EM image with small vesicles and LDCV
Molecules of neurotransmitters are often
stored in synaptic vesicles before being released.
Synaptic vesicles are tiny spheres of lipids just
like the cell membrane. These vesicles can be
roughly characterized into one of two classes:
1. Small vesicles. These vesicles have a diameter
of 40 nanometers and a volume of about 30 cubic
microns. Given the size of neurotransmitters,
we can estimate at somewhere on the order of
thousands to tens of thousands of molecules of
neurotransmitter can be stored in each vesicle.
Small vesicles store most of the neurotransmitters
we most often think of, including glutamate, GABA,
dopamine, and norepinephrine, for example.
Small vesicles are almost always exclusive found
in the axon terminals.
2. Large dense-core vesicles. These vesicles
are much larger than small vesicles, with a range
of diameter from 100 to 250 nanometers. They
store peptides such as dynorphin or enkephalin,
which have chemical structures much larger than membranes, with one side facing the intracellular
the other neurotransmitters. Since these peptides space and other facing the inside of the vesicle.
are packaged into their vesicles near the nucleus, Their main function is to take molecules of
large dense-core vesicles can be found in the cell neurotransmitter from the intracellular space of
bodies and all along the axons in addition to the the axon terminal and pump them into vesicles.
axon terminal. Many of the vesicular transporters are
named based on the neurotransmitters that they
Loading of vesicles are capable of recognizing and transporting.
Vesicles need to be filled with molecules of Some have a single substrate, such as vesicular
neurotransmitter before release into the synapse. GABA transporters (VGAT) which move GABA,
In small vesicles, filling is only made possible vesicular glutamate transporters (VGluT) which
through the action of giant transmembrane move glutamate, and vesicular acetylcholine
proteins called vesicular transporters. These transporter (VAChT) which moves acetylcholine
are protein complexes that span the vesicular into vesicles. Others recognize a broad class
5-6
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

of neurotransmitters, such as the vesicular an area of high concentration to low concentration,
monoamine transporters (VMATs), which are energy is generated. The vesicular transporters use
responsible for moving monoamines such as this energy to push neurotransmitter in. Because
dopamine and serotonin into the vesicles. H+ ions move opposite of the neurotransmitter
Vesicular transporters are able to function molecules, vesicular transporters are called
because the interior of the vesicle is highly acidic antiporters. Transporters have slightly different
compared to the interior of the cell. Vesicles stoichiometries, as it requires two protons to
have a high concentration of H+ ions (protons) move a single molecule of dopamine, while
because of the action of the transmembrane the energy from a single proton is sufficient to
enzyme vesicular ATP-ase, or v-ATP-ase. transport GABA or glutamate.
These membrane-embedded proteins utilize the
molecular energy contained in ATP to concentrate Location of vesicles
H+ ions in the intravesicular space. For each Synaptic vesicles can be found in one of
molecule of ATP used, one proton gets pumped three places at the axon terminal.
into the vesicle.
Vesicular transporters pump molecules 1. Readily releasable pool (RRP). These
of neurotransmitter against their concentration vesicles are located close to the cell membrane
gradients, which is an energetically difficult task. at the axon terminal. In fact, many of them are
To have enough energy, the vesicular transporters already “docked,” meaning that their coat proteins
use the high intravesicular concentration of H+ to are already interacting closely with the proteins
move molecules of neurotransmitter across the on the inside of the cell membrane. When the
vesicular membrane. When a proton moves from depolarizing charge of an action potential reaches
Fig 5.6 Synaptic vesicles in the axon terminal get filled by the action of two different vesicular transporter
proteins. The v-ATP-ase uses energy to pump H+ into the vesicle against it’s concentration gradient
(left). Then, a vesicular transporter such as vGluT use the movement of H+ down it’s concentration
gradient to increase intravesicular concentration of neurotransmitter (right).
Axon Terminal
Synaptic vesicle
Glu
H+ H+
ATP ADP
5-7
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

the terminal, these vesicles at the RRP are the Release of vesicles
first ones that fuse with the cell membrane and At a chemical synapse, the process of
release their contents. neurotransmitter release is very tightly regulated.
If there were no mechanisms to control the release
2. Recycling pool. These vesicles are of chemicals at the synapse, nerve cells would
the ones that have been depleted due to release. deplete their entire stock of neurotransmitter. The
They are currently in the process of being refilled signals that trigger muscle contraction at the NMJ
or reloaded with neurotransmitter. They are would cause constant muscle tension. All sorts of
farther from the cell membrane, and the protein brain signals would be active, and over-excitation
machinery is not primed for release, so it requires would cause toxicity. Needless to say, regulated
a more intense stimulation to release the contents control of neurotransmitter release is a normal
of these vesicles. and essential part of nervous system function.
Regulation of release depends on several
3. Reserve pool. These vesicles are the proteins that are important parts of the process.
farthest from the surface of the cell membrane, These proteins are often embedded within cell
and most vesicles are held in this reserve pool. membranes of the vesicles or the neuronal
For these neurons to be released, very intense membrane.
stimulation is required. Reserve pool vesicles
may not even be recruited for release under 1. V-SNAREs are the proteins expressed
physiological conditions. on vesicles (v for vesicle). Synaptobrevin
and synaptotagmin are two specific
Fig 5.7 Axon terminals contain hundreds of vesicles roughly
v-SNARE proteins that are involved
divided into three categories.
during synaptic release.
Axon Terminal
2. T-SNAREs are proteins
Reserve pool expressed on the cytoplasmic side of
the axon terminal. The inside of the
cytoplasm is the “target” for the vesicle
Recycling pool
(The t in t-SNARE). Syntaxin and
Readily releasable synaptosomal nerve-associated protein
pool (RRP)
25, or SNAP-25 for short, are t-SNAREs
that function during vesicular fusion.
Fig 5.8 v-SNARE proteins interact with t-SNARE proteins to allow for vesicular fusion and release of
neurotransmitter.
Synaptotagmin
Syntaxin
SNAP-25
5-8
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Clinical connection: Botulism Healthy NMJ
Botulism is a deadly condition that
Vesicle
Acetylcholine
results from exposure to the spores produced
by the bacteria Clostridium botulinum. Toxic
spores can be found in the soil, contaminated Synaptobrevin
foods, or water. The toxin itself is one of the
Synaptotagmin
most potent agents known to man - exposure
to concentrations as low as 2ng/kg is lethal.
SNAP-25
The most common symptoms include muscle
weakness or paralysis, especially the muscles
Botulinum toxin-exposed NMJ
of the face or the limbs. For about 5% of
people who develop botulism, death results
from paralysis due to respiratory failure.
Botulinum toxin is known to selectively
cleave the proteins that comprise the SNARE
Botulinum toxin
complex. There are a few specific types
of botulinum toxin with slightly different Fig 5.9 Botulinum toxin selectively cleaves
intracellular targets, but the result is the same vesicular fusion proteins, preventing
on the molecular level: prevention of vesicular acetylcholine from being released at the NMJ.
fusion eliminating neurotransmitter signals.
Despite being one of the deadliest by paralyzing the muscles. Botulinum toxin is
toxins so far identified, millions of people also used medically for conditions resulting
pay to have a preparation of toxin called from excessive neurotransmitter release, such
“Botox” injected into their face. For most, the as muscle spasms, excessive sweating, or
injection of botox is a cosmetic procedure migraine.
that can reduce the appearance of wrinkles
Fusing of vesicles capable of detecting elevated levels of Ca2+ in the
The last step of neurotransmitter release axon terminal. As it turns out, an elevation of Ca2+
is the fusing of the cell membrane. In order to in the intracellular space is the “go ahead” signal
release their chemical contents into the synapse, that causes neurotransmitter release.
vesicles need to fuse with the cell membrane. As The concentration of intracellular calcium,
the vesicular membrane merges with the interior generally in the range of 100 nM, is much lower
of the neuronal membrane, the contents of the than the concentration outside the cell. Embedded
vesicle become exposed to the extracellular in the cell membrane of the axon terminals
space. Only then are the neurotransmitters are transmembrane proteins called “voltage-
capable of activating receptors. gated calcium channels” or VGCCs. As their
One of the key proteins required for name suggests, they function very similarly to
vesicular fusion is the vesicle-embedded the voltage-gated sodium channels described
V-SNARE synaptotagmin. This protein is in previous chapters: they are large protein
5-9
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

tighter together, it causes the vesicle membrane
complexes that normally remain closed, but when
to approach the inside of the cell membrane,
the surrounding neuronal membrane becomes
which results in vesicular fusion.
depolarized, they physically change conformation
Vesicles are capable of fusing in at least
and open up, allowing ions to move across the
two different ways.
cell membrane. These VGCCs selectively pass
only Ca2+ ions. The electrochemical gradient 1. Full fusion. A vesicle that undergoes
full fusion experiences total endocytosis. The
causes these Ca2+ ions to enter into the cell.
vesicular membrane becomes completely
As the change in membrane potential
integrated with the cellular membrane, and all of
travels down the length of the axon (the action
the neurotransmitter spills into the synapse.
potential), it causes a depolarization at the
2. Kiss-and-run. This method of
terminal, triggering calcium entry via the VGCCs.
neurotransmitter release is incomplete fusion.
Ca2+ at the terminal binds with synaptotagmin.
The vesicle only partly connects with the interior
The v-SNAREs and the t-SNAREs interact with
surface of the cell membrane, and only a limited
one another in the presence of Ca2+, forming a
number of neurotransmitter molecules are able to
molecular structure called a SNARE complex.
enter the synapse via diffusion.
The SNARE complex looks a lot like two twist
ties that are wound tightly together. As they twist
Fig 5.10 Synaptic vesicles either fuse completely (left) or partially in kiss-and-run (right).
Full fusion
Kiss-and-run
5-10
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

5.3 Receptors
Receptors are proteins that are capable Receptors are classified into one of two
of sending a signal to change the function or main categories.
activity of a neuron. Most receptors that function 1. Ionotropic receptors. Physically,
in neurotransmission are large transmembrane ionotropic receptors are transmembrane proteins
proteins. On the extracellular surface is a with a large-diameter pore through which ions
specific series of amino acid residues called can pass. These channels only open when a
the active site. The active site, also called the molecule of chemical binds to the active site on the
orthosteric site, is shaped to allow molecules of extracellular side of the protein. These chemicals
neurotransmitter to bind to the receptor. are also called ligands, and so ionotropic
receptors are also called ligand-gated
ion channels. Once a neurotransmitter
Fig 5.11 Ionotropic receptors (top) allow ion
activates the ionotropic receptor, ions will
movement after receptor binding, while metabotropic
move based on the electrochemical gradient
receptors (bottom) trigger second messengers to
for that ion. As a result of ion movement, the
induce signaling.
cell’s membrane potential will change. For
Neurotransmitter
example, nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
Neurotransmitter released from synapse
bound to receptor are ligand-gated sodium channels, so when
these receptors are activated by a ligand
like acetylcholine, sodium ions enter into the
Ion
cell causing depolarization and excitation.
Ionotropic receptors are able to
induce a change in membrane potential
very rapidly, on the scale of milliseconds.
Due to the nature of the amino acid
residues that make up the pore of ionotropic
receptors, they can be very selective for
certain ions. For example, negatively
charged residues lining the inside of the
pore repel negatively charged Cl- ions while
allowing positively charged cations to pass
through the channel.
2. Metabotropic receptors. These
receptor complexes cause the cell to
change its metabolism in a way that leads
to either excitation or inhibition. Ions do
not pass through these receptors. Instead,
Second
G protein
messenger metabotropic receptors use the actions of G
proteins, proteins which induce changes in
5-11
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

neuronal excitability through the action of second inner surface of the cell membrane. Functionally
messenger signaling molecules. speaking, these G proteins are capable of binding
Physically, metabotropic receptors are to molecules of guanosine triphosphate (GTP)
transmembrane proteins that contain 7 alpha- or guanosine diphosphate (GDP). Chemically
helix motifs that pass through the cell membrane. similar to ATP, GTP can function as a source of
The N-terminus of the protein is extracellular, and energy. G proteins themselves exhibit catalytic
the protein “weaves” back and forth across the activity of GTP. This means that they are capable of
cell membrane, resulting in a protein with three breaking down GTP into the less-energetic GDP.
extracellular loops and three intracellular loops. When GTP is bound to the GPCR, the receptor
Because of this shape, these receptors are also is active. When this molecule is hydrolyzed into
called seven-transmembrane receptors, or GDP, the receptor becomes inactive.
7-TM receptors. Some G proteins are heterotrimeric,
Another name for these receptors is meaning that they are made up of three different
“G protein-coupled receptors”, or GPCRs. subunits, alpha, beta, and gamma. The GTP
Metabotropic receptors are physically linked to binding sites and catalytic sites are found on the
proteins called G proteins, which exist on the alpha subunit, the largest of the three subunits.
Fig 5.12 GPCRs signal via activation of the G protein attached to the intracellular side of the receptor.
5-12
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Usually, the alpha subunit becomes soluble after PKA is a kinase, an enzyme that is
activation, while the beta / gamma complex stays phosphorylates other proteins. The addition of
embedded in the neuronal membrane. The G a phosphate group onto a protein changes its
alpha subunit exists in different varieties. properties dramatically. PKA phosphorylates
protein targets that increase cell excitation.
G . When a neurotransmitter activates a For example, one target of PKA activity is the
αs
GPCR coupled with the G protein, the G protein intracellular side of certain glutamate receptors.
αs αs
is excitatory (The “s” stands for stimulatory). Phosphorylation causes these receptors to stay
Binding of a ligand to the active site of open longer than normal when they are activated
Galphas-coupled GPCRs results in increased by a molecule of glutamate. This means that
activity of the enzyme adenylate cyclase (AC). a single molecule of glutamate causes more
AC itself is an enzyme that creates a second excitation (passes more depolarizing current into
messenger, a molecule called cyclic AMP the cell) in the presence of increased PKA activity.
(cAMP). Elevated levels of cAMP activate an Targets of PKA activity also include the
enzyme called protein kinase A (PKA). intracellular store of glutamate receptors. When
phosphorylated, these receptors are trafficked to
the neuronal membrane. An increase of receptors
Fig 5.13 GPCRs that are coupled with G are
αs
at the postsynaptic side leads to increased
excitatory through adenylate cyclase signaling.
excitatory neurotransmission over a period of
G protein coupled minutes and hours, representing one form of
receptor Glutamate receptor
plasticity.
An even longer-term action of PKA is
its ability to change the transcription of various
genes, which can trigger the synthesis of
Adenylate cyclase
proteins. Some genes downstream of PKA activity
include the structural protein actin, important for
cAMP morphological changes in neuronal structure, or
ion channels which change neuronal responses
to neurotransmitter release.
PKA
G . A GPCR that is coupled with G
αi αi
causes a decrease in excitability. In many ways,
G proteins serve the opposite function as G
αi αs
proteins - the “i” stands for inhibitory.
Whereas activation of G increases
αs
the action of AC, G proteins decrease AC
Target genes αi
activity. Therefore, G activation decreases
αi
the intracellular concentration of cAMP, in turn
Nucleus decreasing PKA activity. Given the function of PKA
as a kinase that increases cellular excitation as
5-13
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

described above, decreased PKA activity inhibits potassium channel conductance.
cellular activity through multiple mechanisms, While the alpha subunits carry out a large
some of which include decreased current through part of GPCR-mediated changes in cellular
glutamate receptors, decreased trafficking of excitation, the beta and gamma subunits also
glutamate receptors to the presynaptic neuronal affect excitability. The beta and gamma subunits
membrane, and decreased transcription of certain are bound together as a dimer, but they separate
genes. from the alpha subunit once the GPCR becomes
activated. The beta-gamma complex can also
G . Generally, G is an excitatory G function as a signaling molecule.
αq αq
protein. G uses a different signaling pathway Compared to ionotropic receptors,
αq
compared to the PKA pathway that is downstream metabotropic receptors affect neuron activity on a
of G or G . G protein activation leads to activity slower time scale, on the range of milliseconds to
αs αi αq
of the enzyme phospholipase C (PLC). seconds, and possibly even longer depending on
On a biomolecular level, PLC acts the downstream mechanisms that are activated.
on the phospholipid membrane molecule
phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2). Presynaptic receptors
PLC is a hydrolytic enzyme, and it breaks PIP2 In the discussion of receptors, it is common
into two separate second messenger molecules: to think of receptors as being expressed at the
the soluble inositol triphosphate (IP3) and the dendrites, embedded within the postsynaptic
membrane-embedded diacylglycerol (DAG). One membrane. However, not all receptors are
of the functions of IP3 is to liberate Ca2+ from located here. Some receptors are presynaptic,
intracellular stores, which elevates intracellular meaning they can be found at the axon terminal.
Ca2+ levels, depolarizing the cell and activating Presynaptic receptors are often inhibitory and
calcium-dependent processes, which are often serve a self-regulatory function. Presynaptically-
excitatory. DAG activates protein kinase C expressed receptors that respond to the same
(PKC), an enzyme with substrates that increase neurotransmitter that is released are called
neurotransmitter release probability or decrease autoreceptors.
Fig 5.14 G signals using PLC, which then produces two signaling molecules, IP3 and DAG.
αq
5-14
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

5.4 Neurotransmitters
As described previously, neurotransmitters Na+ to move into the cell. Ionotropic glutamate
are the substances that are released at chemical receptors are generally subdivided into three
synapses, and they are the signaling molecules classes, named after exogenous chemicals that
that allow neurons to communicate with one can activate the receptor. AMPA receptors are
another. To date, scientists have identified Na+ channels, but some also allow Ca2+ entry.
more than 100 neurotransmitters. Here, we will NMDA receptors allow both Na+ and Ca2+ to pass
describe six classical neurotransmitters, their across the membrane. When the cell is at rest,
receptors, and their actions. Additionally, three NMDA receptors also have a large magnesium
atypical neurotransmitters will be introduced. ion in the pore that blocks ion movement through
One important note to keep in mind as the channel. The third category of ionotropic
you think about neurotransmitters: the effect glutamate receptors is called kainate receptors,
that a neurotransmitter has on a cell depends on which are similar to AMPA receptors.
the receptor. In other words, a neurotransmitter The metabotropic glutamate receptors
molecule can either excite or inhibit a neuron (mGluRs) signal using different G proteins. There
depending on the composition of receptors are a total of 8 of these mGluRs, classified into
that are present. For example, glutamate is three groups, called Group I, Group II, and Group
excitatory at most synapses in the nervous III. Group I are excitatory GPCRs which signal via
system. Glutamate exerts excitation by activating Gq, while Group II and Group III are inhibitory via
ionotropic glutamate receptors, which are the Gi signal transduction pathway.
ligand-gated cation channels. However, at one One theory proposes that excess signaling
particular synapse in the eye, glutamate activates by glutamate can lead to neuronal death, a
a metabotropic glutamate receptor that causes phenomenon called excitotoxicity. Of the
cellular inhibition.
Fig 5.15 Glutamate is the main excitatory
Glutamate neurotransmitter in the nervous system, acting at
Glutamate (Glu) is the main excitatory different categories of receptors, three of which
neurotransmitter used by the nervous system. are shown below.
Glutamate is the same as the amino acid glutamic
Glutamate
acid. There is more glutamate per volume of
brain tissue than any other neurotransmitter.
Glutamatergic neurons are identified by the
AMPA NMDA mGluR
presence of the vesicular glutamate transporter
(vGluT).
Mg2+
Glutamate can activate both ionotropic
and metabotropic receptors. Ionotropic glutamate
receptors are all ligand-gated cation channels,
which makes them excitatory since they allow
Na+ Na+ Ca2+
5-15
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

various glutamate receptors, the NMDA receptor The main action of GABA as an inhibitory
is most strongly implicated in contributing to neurotransmitter is to activate one of three main
excitotoxicity, since uncontrolled elevated classes of receptors, called A, B, and C. GABA
A
levels of calcium can be deadly for neurons. receptors are ligand-gated chloride channels,
Excitotoxicity is observed in a variety of disease so activating these ion channels causes Cl- flux,
states ranging from neurodegenerative disorders which opposes the ability for the cell to reach
such as Parkinson’s disease, Alzheimer’s action potential threshold. GABA and GABA
B C
disease, and multiple sclerosis, but also in injury receptors are both metabotropic receptors that
such as concussion or stroke. inhibit neuronal activity through the action of the
G protein.
i
GABA + glycine A neurotransmitter that is similar to GABA
Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) is the is glycine. Another small amino acid, glycine is
main inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain. mostly used by neurons of the spinal cord and
According to one estimate, about 25% of neurons brain stem. Glycine is also inhibitory , and acts at
in the brain are GABA-ergic. Chemically speaking, glycine receptors, which are ligand-gated chloride
GABA is remarkably similar to glutamate. In channels.
fact, GABA is synthesized from glutamate in
a single step by the enzyme glutamic acid Dopamine
decarboxylase (GAD). GAD is often used as a Dopamine (DA) is a biogenic amine
biochemical marker for the presence of GABA- derived from the amino acid tyrosine through
ergic neurons. Many interneurons use GABA as the action of several enzymes. One in particular,
their chemical signaling molecule. tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), is the main marker
that is used for identifying dopamine-producing
Fig 5.16 The inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA is neurons. Unlike glutamate or GABA, dopamine-
synthesized from glutamate by the action of GAD. producing neurons are not widely abundant in
the brain. Instead, there are generally only a few
patches of neurons that produce dopamine, most
of which are found in the midbrain. Two areas
include the ventral tegmental area and the
substantia nigra.
There are five classes of dopamine
receptors, named D1 through D5. All of them are
Glutamatic acid
metabotropic receptors. D1 and D5 are generally
decarboxylase (GAD)
excitatory receptors, while D2, D3, and D4 are
inhibitory receptors.
Since Roy Wise’s theory proposed in
the 1960s, DA has been known in pop culture
as the “pleasure neurotransmitter” because of
its involvement in the processing of reward and
motivation. For example, if we use microdialysis
5-16
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Frontal
Striatum
cortex
Substantia
nigra (SN)
Nucleus
accumbens (NAc)
Ventral tegmental
area (VTA) Hippocampus
Fig 5.17 Brain dopamine is synthesized in two major
midbrain nuclei, the VTA and SN, labeled in green.
(a technique to measure the concentration of
chemicals) in the nucleus accumbens, dopamine
levels spike in response to all sorts of pleasurable
or rewarding stimuli: food, water, sex, sugar, and
exposure to drugs of abuse. However, we now
know that dopamine is much more complex
than once believed. One theory suggests that
dopamine elevation serves as a “learning signal”
that causes us to pay attention to salient stimuli
in the environment.
DA is also needed for normal motor
control. When dopamine-producing neurons
400%
350%
300%
250%
200%
150%
100%
50%
Time
5-17
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com
xuffle
enimapoD
in the substantia nigra pars compacta
(SNpc) degenerate, as in Parkinson’s
disease, a person develops the trademark
symptoms: difficulties with motor control,
resulting in a resting tremor, postural
instability, and bradykinesia (slowness
of movement). Reversing the dopamine
deficiency by introducing an exogenous
source of dopamine is our current gold
standard of treatment for PD.
Serotonin
Serotonin (5-HT) is a
neurotransmitter that is derived from the dietary
amino acid tryptophan. The enzyme tryptophan
hydroxylase is the first step of serotonin
biosynthesis and is often used as a marker to
identify serotonergic neurons. As with dopamine,
there are only a few areas of the brain that
synthesize serotonin, the major one being the
Raphe nucleus in the brain stem.
Receptors for serotonin have a wide variety
of actions. We have identified seven major families
of 5-HT receptors, which are designated by the
number and subclasses which are designated by
a letter. For example, the 5-HT2A receptor
Fig 5.18 Levels of dopamine in the NAc rise when
is metabotropic and excitatory via Gq
animals lever press for delicious foods, denoted in red.
signaling, while the 5-HT5 receptor is
inhibitory via Gi signaling. Most of them
are metabotropic receptors; only the
5-HT3 receptor is ionotropic.
Serotonin is heavily implicated
in the regulation of mood and complex
behavioral conditions. One of our most
effective strategies for treating depression
is the administration of a drug such as
fluoxetine, which acts as a selective-
serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI).
Pharmacologically, fluoxetine increases

Clinical correlation: Parkinson’s disease (PD) and L-DOPA-induced dyskinesia (LID)
Parkinson’s disease is a debilitating neurodegenerative disorder that affects as many as 1%
of all people aged 60 or older. Generally, PD is lethal within 16 years. By the time a patient presents
to the clinic with motor dysfunction, they have already lost almost 60-80% of dopamine-producing
neurons in this area!
For decades, clinicians have been using the biochemical
precursor to dopamine, L-DOPA, to treat the symptoms.
However, after chronic exposure to L-DOPA, the drug becomes
less effective and has a shorter duration of therapeutic action.
Worse still, frequent treatment can lead patients to develop
hyperkinesias, an abnormal excess of movements. This
iatrogenic disorder is called L-DOPA induced dyskinesia
(LID).
Biomedical engineers have developed a promising non-
drug approach to treating PD called deep brain stimulation.
A small stimulating device is surgically implanted into the
subthalamic nucleus of the brain. When this brain area is
stimulated, neural circuits are recruited which restores normal
motor control.
Aromatic amino acid
decarboxylase (AADC)
L-DOPA Dopamine
Fig 5.19 Patients with PD have characteristic changes in gait as a result of low dopamine (top).
The current best pharmacological therapy is levodopa administration, which is the biochemical
precursor to dopamine (bottom).
synaptic levels of serotonin by preventing Acetylcholine
reuptake, and for some people, this has a moderate Acetylcholine (ACh) is a small
ability to reverse depression. Serotonin signaling molecule that is made by the enzyme choline
is also a target for drugs that treat anxiety, post- acetyltransferase (ChAT), which chemically
traumatic stress disorder, obsessive-compulsive bonds a molecule of acetyl-CoA with a molecule
disorder, schizophrenia, and more. of choline. The presence of ChAT in a neuron is
used as a biochemical marker for neurons that
produce acetylcholine.
5-18
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

ACh was the first neurotransmitter nicotine in addition to acetylcholine. These
discovered and chemically isolated, a feat which ionotropic receptors are ligand-gated sodium
earned two researchers the shared Nobel Prize channels and are therefore excitatory. On the
in Physiology or Medicine in 1936. One of the two other hand, the metabotropic receptors are called
scientists, a German pharmacologist named Otto muscarinic acetylcholine receptors (mAChRs)
Loewi, stimulated the vagus nerve connected to since they are activated by the chemical
an isolated frog heart, which caused the heart muscarine found in some species of mushrooms.
rate to slow down. When he put the surrounding MAChRs can be coupled with either G or G, so
s i
solution on top of another heart, he observed they can be either excitatory or inhibitory.
that the second heart also slowed down, despite ACh is the main neurotransmitter that the
having no physical connection to the first heart. nervous system uses in order to communicate
From this, he concluded that a chemical released with the muscles at the neuromuscular junction
by the vagus nerve is able to decrease heart rate. (NMJ). Here, ACh is released by motor neurons,
This chemical was first called Vagusstoff, the where it activates nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
German word meaning Vagus substance. Today, on muscle cells, causing them to constrict, or
we know it as acetylcholine. flex. On the other hand, muscarinic acetylcholine
ACh is able to act at ionotropic and receptors are located in the heart, and their
metabotropic receptors, and activity at both activation causes a decrease in heart rate (as
receptor classes is essential for normal function. Otto Loewi demonstrated with the isolated frog
The ionotropic receptors of the nervous system heart preparation.)
are called nicotinic acetylcholine receptors In the central nervous system, ACh is
(nAChRs) because they can be activated by involved in a wide variety of processes, including
attention and learning. One of the first
Fig 5.20 An electron microscope image of the neuromuscular theories to explain the symptoms of
junction showing vesicles (T, top) forming a synapse with Alzheimer’s disease looked at a loss
the muscle cell (M, bottom). Acetylcholine is the main of ACh-producing neurons in the basal
neurotransmitter used in muscle control at the PNS. forebrain that become more severe
as the disease worsens. It has since
been demonstrated that Alzheimer’s
disease is more complex than this
early hypothesis.
Norepinephrine
Norepinephrine (NE) is a
neurotransmitter that is synthesized
from a molecule of dopamine
by the enzyme dopamine beta-
hydroxylase. Norepinephrine-
producing cells are localized in the
pons of the brain stem, a structure
5-19
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

called the locus coeruleus. The locus coeruleus beta-agonists are used as bronchodilators for
is very small, but these neurons send projections asthma.
widely throughout the brain. Norepinephrine also functions in
the brain to modulate behaviors including
Fig 5.21 Norepinephrine in the brain is synthesized by
alertness and attention.
small populations, but these cell bodies project widely
across several other areas.
Atypical neurotransmitters
Although we generally think of
Frontal
neurotransmitters as neurochemicals that
lobe Thalamus
function as described above, there are a
Cingulate gyrus
few atypical neurotransmitters that don’t
quite fit the mold of the other chemical
Hippocampus signals.
Amygdala Neuropeptides
Locus coeruleus Neuropeptides are a class of large
Lateral tegmental signaling molecules that some neurons
NE cell system synthesize. Neuropeptides are different
To spinal cord
from the traditional neurotransmitters because
Outside of the brain, we think of of their chemical size. Monoamines like DA, NE,
norepinephrine as being responsible for triggering or 5-HT have a molecular weight around 150-
the sympathetic nervous system response of the 200, while one of the smaller neuropeptides,
body, the “fight-or-flight” reaction that prepares enkephalin, has a molecular weight of 570. One
the body for physical activity in times of fear or of the largest, dynorphin, has a molecular weight
acute stress. These norepinephrine-producing greater than 2,000. Because of their large size,
nerve cells reside in the sympathetic ganglia, a neuropeptides have to be packaged in dense-
clump of nerve cells that run parallel to the spinal core vesicles very close to the site of production
cord, one on each half of the body. These neurons near the nucleus rather than in clear vesicles right
project out towards the internal organs. at the terminal.
Receptors for NE are classified into
two main categories, alpha or beta. There are
subtypes within each category, giving us five
major receptors for NE: alpha-1, alpha-2, beta-
1, beta-2, and beta-3. All five of these receptors
are metabotropic, and some are excitatory while
others are inhibitory. Our internal organs express Fig 5.22 Enkephalin, one of the smaller
these noradrenergic receptors. Clinically, the neuropeptides, is very large compared to other
“beta blockers” are a class of drugs that inhibit neurotransmitters. Enkephalin is an agonist for
beta-adrenergic receptors; the resulting action is both δ and μ opioid receptors.
a decrease in blood pressure. Conversely, some
5-20
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Neuropeptides such as enkephalin and
dynorphin are agonists at a class of receptors Cannabinoid
called the opioid receptors. These opioid receptor
receptors fall into four main types. The three
Presynaptic
classical opioid receptors are named using Greek
neuron
letters: δ (delta), μ (mu), and κ (kappa), and the
fourth class is the nociceptin receptor. All of these
Neurotransmitter
receptors are inhibitory metabotropic receptors
which signal using the G protein.
αi
These receptors are expressed in several
brain areas, but expression is particularly heavy
Receptors
in the periaqueductal gray, a midbrain area that
Postsynaptic
functions to inhibit the sensation of pain. Drugs
neuron
that activate the opioid receptors, like morphine,
Endocannabinoid
oxycontin, or fentanyl, are the most effective
clinical treatments that we know of for acute pain.
Unfortunately, these same drugs also represent Fig 5.23 ECBs are synthesized from the
a tremendous health risk, as opioid drugs can postsynaptic cell membrane and signal through
be lethal in overdose and have a high risk of presynaptic cannabinoid receptors
substance use disorder.
ECBs activate one of two receptors, CB1 and
Endocannabinoids (eCBs) CB2. Both of them are inhibitory metabotropic
The eCBs are a class of lipid- receptors that couple with Galphai. Generally,
based neurotransmitters. They are unusual CB1 receptors are found in the nervous system,
neurochemicals in a few ways. Instead of while the CB2 receptors are found elsewhere in
sending information from the axon of one neuron the body, such as in the immune system.
to the dendrite of the next neuron (anterograde The eCB system is widely used by various
signaling), eCBs allow the postsynaptic dendritic systems in the body. It is estimated that eCB
component to communicate with the presynaptic receptors are the most abundant GPCRs in the
axon terminal. Since they communicate whole body.
information in the “opposite” direction of classic These substances were named because
neurotransmitter signaling, eCBs are called they are endogenous chemicals that are
retrograde signaling molecules. Secondly, eCBs functionally similar to compounds found in plants
are not packaged into vesicles and released by of the genus Cannabis. One reason cannabis is
fusion processes. Instead, eCBs are synthesized used is because of its ability to interact with our
de novo, meaning they get created right when eCB receptors.
they needed and used at that moment. The two
most well-characterized eCBs in humans are Nitric oxide
called 2-AG and AEA. The nervous system is capable of signaling
via the gas nitric oxide (NO). This gasotransmitter
5-21
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

is not stored in vesicles but rather is synthesized receptor for NO is an intracellular receptor called
as it is needed. NO is formed when the amino soluble guanylate cyclase (sGC). SGC works
acid arginine is degraded by the enzyme NO through a signaling pathway that is different from
synthase (NOS). other metabotropic receptors so far described.
Because NO is a gas, it easily permeates SGC is linked with the signaling molecule cyclic
across cell membranes. Therefore, the receptors GMP (cGMP), which activates protein kinase
for NO do not need to be transmembrane proteins G. PKG can either be excitatory or inhibitory,
expressed on the cell surface. Instead, the depending on the intracellular components.
Chapter summary called receptors. Upon binding a molecule of
Neurons communicate with one another neurotransmitter, these receptors physically
in a variety of ways. Anatomically, neurons are change shape, resulting in ion flow across
separated by a small extracellular gap called the membrane (ionotropic receptors) or a
the synapse. This synapse may directly connect change in the activity of intracellular signaling
the intracellular cytoplasm, as in an electrical molecules (metabotropic receptors). Binding
synapse. Alternatively, the gap may be much of neurotransmitter changes the excitability of
larger, and chemicals that get released and neurons.
diffuse across the synapse in order to signal We have so far identified more than
to the following neuron. These chemicals, the 100 neurotransmitters. Many of them are small
neurotransmitters, are stored in vesicles, tiny molecules that are packaged in vesicles, which
spheres that are located in the presynaptic axon then diffuse from the presynaptic neuron to the
terminal. The release of these chemicals is very postsynaptic neuron, such as acetylcholine,
closely regulated, and neurons have several glutamate, or GABA. However, there are some
mechanisms that regulate vesicular fusion. atypical neurotransmitters such as neuropeptides,
Following release, the neurotransmitters endocannabinoids, and nitric oxide that have
diffuse across the synapse and can bind to different methods of communication.
the active site on transmembrane proteins
The Open Neuroscience Initiative is funded by a grant from the Vincentian Endowment Fund of
DePaul University.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International License.
5-22
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Image credits
Cover: Image found at https://www.hippopx.com/en/people-letters-envelope-pen-dip-pen-writings-
ink-62437
5.1 https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/78/Gap_cell_junction_keys.svg modified by
Austin Lim
5.2 https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/e4/A_skybridge_at_IUPUI_campus.jpg
5.3 https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/ed/Charcot-marie-tooth_foot.jpg
5.4 (Left) https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4c/Synapse_diag1.svg modified by Austin
Lim
(Right) https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Synapse_diag4.png#file modified by Austin Lim
5.8 https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/28/Opening_of_a_Fusion_Pore_during_
Exocytosis.png modified by Austin Lim
5.9 https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/1e/Botulinum_Toxin_Mechanism.png modified
by Austin Lim
5.10 https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/0/0c/0310_Exocytosis_cleaned.png modified by
Austin Lim
5.11 https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/e7/1226_Receptor_Types.jpg modified by
Austin Lim
5.12 https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/6d/GPCR-Zyklus.png
5.13 https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/8f/CREB_cAMP_neuron_pathway.svg
modified by Austin Lim
5.14 https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/3/31/Activation_protein_kinase_C.svg modified
by Austin Lim
5.17 https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/de/Dopamine_pathways.svg modified by
Austin Lim
5.18 Data from K.N. Segovia, M. Correa, J.D. Salamone, Slow phasic changes in nucleus accumbens
dopamine release during fixed ratio acquisition: a microdialysis study, Neuroscience, Volume 196, 2011,
Pages 178-188, ISSN 0306-4522, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.07.078. Reprinted with
permission 2/15/2020
5.19 https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/44/Sir_William_Richard_Gowers_Parkinson_
5-23
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com



Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Austin Lim, PhD (DePaul University)
Editor: Dana Simmons, PhD (University of Chicago)
One of the interesting properties of neurons one part of a neuron to send signals over long
is that their cell membranes are electroactive, distances – hence, the analogy of electrical wires
meaning that they are sensitive to electrical running overhead. In this chapter, we will go
charge. Neurons are capable of changing the into depth describing the molecular and cellular
electrical potential of their membranes, which components that contribute to the electrical
makes them a very dynamic population of cells. properties of a neuron, both at rest and during an
These changes, which can happen on the scale action potential.
of milliseconds, provide a rapid method for
Chapter 4 outline
4.1 Ion channels
4.2 The electrochemical gradient
4.3 The Nernst equation
4.4 The action potential
4.5 Movement of action potentials
4.1 Ion channels
The cell membrane that separates the proteins embedded in the cell membrane.
inside of the cell from the outside is a very effective These transmembrane proteins are huge
boundary. It is described as being selectively protein complexes that span the entirety of the
permeable, which means that some molecules membrane, with an outer side and an inner side.
are able to travel across the membrane easily, In the middle of the protein is a pore, which is
other molecules have an intermediate ability essentially a “tunnel” that allows molecules
to cross, and other molecules are completely and ions to pass across the cell membrane.
incapable of passing. Generally, gases and These proteins are called ion channels. These
molecules of water are able to pass through channels are passive since they do not use any
the cell membrane easily. Large molecules cellular energy to move ions. Rather, they simply
like glucose, and charged molecules like ions provide easy passage for ions. It may be useful to
or amino acids, are unable to pass across the think of an ion channel as a “cellular door.”
membrane. One important feature of ion channels
Most cells of the body, including is their ability to distinguish ions based on
neurons, have specialized transmembrane their chemical properties. For example, some
4-2
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Gases Hydrophobic Small polar Large polar Charged
molecules molecules molecules molecules
Steroids
Water Glucose Ions
ethanol
O
2
-
H
2
+
CO
2
Figure 4.1 Selective permeability of molecules across the cell membrane.
channels are selective for Na+, while preventing
Closed Open
the passage of all other ions. Each ion channel
configuration configuration
has special molecular characteristics that allow
certain types of ions to pass through the pore
while excluding other ions. Some features that
allow for distinction between ions include:
1. Pore size. The molecular shape of an
ion channel can exclude larger diameter ions if
it is small enough, restricting the ability for the
large ion to enter the pore – in the same way that
a ping pong ball cannot pass through a narrow
diameter of a straw.
2. Electrical charge. Ion channels can
Figure 4.2 Ion channels (purple) are
also prevent certain ions from passing through
transmembrane proteins that can be open,
based on the electrical charge. The inside of the
allowing charged ions to cross the cell membrane
pore is lined with charged amino acids, and their
through a molecular “tunnel” called the pore.
charge allows only certain types of ions to pass.
4-3
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

For example, sodium channels have several categorize ion channels into four major classes
negatively-charged glutamate residues inside based on their opening and closing conditions.
the pore. Because of this, negatively-charged 1. Leak channels are persistently open.
ions like chloride will be repelled by the negative You can think of these leak channels as revolving
charges, but the positively-charged sodium ions doors that are never locked. Neurons usually have
will be attracted to the inside. several leak channels, such as a leak channel for
potassium (K+) and a leak channel for chloride
(Cl-) ions. These two ions are at equilibrium,
flowing back and forth across the cell membrane,
Na+
K+
and they help contribute to the properties of the
neuron at rest.
2. Voltage-gated ion channels are
sensitive to the electrical potential of the
surrounding membrane. Their ability to open
Figure 4.3 Ions dissolved in water are surrounded
and close depends on the electrical charge of
by a shell of water molecules. The potassium ion
the membrane. Many of them, such as voltage-
is larger, and the water molecules are farther
gated sodium (Na+) channels, remain closed at
apart, making the attraction weaker than in the
negative potentials (resting condition) and only
sodium ion.
open at positive potentials (action potential).
3. Ligand-gated ion channels open in
3. Hydration shell. Selectivity based on response to binding certain molecules (ligands),
charge and small size is a simple task, but how such as neurotransmitters. These types of ion
can it be possible for an ion channel to allow larger channels are also called ionotropic receptors,
ions to pass while excluding smaller ions? This is and these will be described in much more depth
possible because it is energetically favorable to in chapter 5.
allow an ion that has been stabilized sufficiently 4. The fourth class of ion channels is a
by the properties of the amino acid residues lining catch-all category that includes a wide variety of
the pore. channels that are used by the sensory systems.
This process is related to the observation They open and close in response to unique stimuli
that a shell of water molecules surrounds each depending on what they are able to sense. For
charged ion in solution. To pass through the pore, example, some open and close depending when
water molecules must be separated from the ion. they are moved physically, such as a distortion
The potassium ion has diffuse hydration shell, and or stretch. We have these in our ears (hair cells,
so it is easier to separate water from a potassium chapter XX), in our skin (Pacinian corpuscles,
ion compared to a sodium ion. The passage of chapter XX) and in our muscles (Golgi tendon
+
potassium becomes more energetically favorable organ, chapter XX). Photoreceptors in our eyes
compared to passing a sodium ion, causing these have ion channels that close in response to
pores to be selective. being hit by photons of light, and this activity is
Like doors, different types of ion channels necessary for us to be able to see in both brightly
open and close under different conditions. We can and dimly lit environments.
4-4
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

4.2 The electrochemical gradient
Without ion channels, ions do not cross the a negative potential, movement of charged ions
cell membrane and therefore stay either outside will change as well. In this case, the electrical
or inside the cell. But when an ion channel is gradient now attracts negatively charged ions
present and open, ions can move across the cell into the cell while pushing positively charged ions
membrane, depending on the specific conditions out of the cell.
inside and outside the neuron. There are two
different forces that act on ions once an ion 2. Chemical gradient
channel is open: the electrical gradient and the The chemical gradient refers to the natural
chemical gradient. process by which a high concentration of a
substance, given enough time, will eventually
1. Electrical gradient diffuse to a lower concentration and settle evenly
The electrical gradient refers to the over the space.
electrical forces acting on charged molecules,
“pulling” opposite charges together while also
“pushing” like charges away from one another -
just like the polarity of magnets.
At rest, the interior of the cell has a negative
charge, about -70 mV. Because of these negative
charges inside the cell, the electrical gradient Figure 4.5 The chemical gradient describes the
causes positively charged ions to be attracted to same forces acting on ions as diffusion, where
the inside of the cell. At the same time, negatively ions move from areas of high concentration to
charged ions will be repelled out of the cell. low concentration.
The voltage of the neuron (V ) can deviate
m
significantly from -70 mV, reaching potentials as You can think of the chemical gradient as
high as +40 mV. When the V changes, the force similar to the way people behave when they exit
m
exerted by the electrical gradient changes as well. a full elevator. People don’t want to be so close
If the cell now has a positive potential instead of to each other inside a cramped space. Once the
doors open, people scatter quickly, going
Figure 4.4 The electrical gradient describes the forces to where they can have more personal
acting on ions as they follow the rules of magnetism in space. They move from an area of high
physics - “opposites attract, and similar charges repel.” concentration to low concentration.
Molecules behave the same way.
+ - - + Unlike the electrical gradient,
the chemical gradient is unaffected
by biological movement of ions. In
other words, the distribution of ions
-70 mV +40 mV
across the membrane does not change
4-5
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

significantly. The number of ions that flow across and Na+ is now able to pass across the cell
the cell membrane is so minute that the relative membrane, the electrical gradient causes the
distribution of ions across the cell membrane sodium to move into the cell.
essentially does not change. We also know that the concentration of
These two forces are collectively called the sodium outside the cell (written as [Na+] , where
o
electrochemical gradient. In order to accurately the brackets indicate concentration and the
predict the forces acting on a given ion, you need “o” refers to “outside”) is high compared to the
to know 1) the charge of the ion and 2) the relative concentration of sodium inside the cell (written
concentrations of ions across the membrane. as [Na+]) by roughly an order of magnitude.
i
Therefore, when that sodium-permeable ion
Take a look at the following two examples : channel opens, Na+ will move from the area of
1. Sodium (Na+) movement across the high concentration to low concentration, causing
membrane Na+ to move into the cell.
Consider the positively-charged ion, Given that both the electrical and chemical
sodium (Na+). Because it has a positive charge, gradients are in favor of moving Na+ into the cell,
it is electrically attracted to the inside of the cell, opening a sodium channel causes a net flow of
which has a negative charge at rest. Therefore, Na+ ions into the cell.
when a sodium-permeable ion channel opens
Extracellular
+ +
+ +
+
+ +
+ +
+
-70 mV
+
Intracellular
Figure 4.6 When a sodium channel opens (purple), sodium ions (orange) are acted on by two forces.
They have a positive charge, which is attracted to the negatively-charged inside of the cell (electrical
gradient). They are at a higher concentration outside the cell, which causes them to move to the inside
of the cell with the lower concentration (chemical gradient).
4-6
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

2. Potassium (K+) movement across the membrane voltage can, you could imagine there
membrane exists some V where the flow of ions moving
m
Just like with sodium, we can use our in are exactly equal to the flow of ions moving
knowledge of potassium’s charge and the out. In this case, the two forces acting on the
distribution of K+ ions across the membrane in ion oppose one another perfectly, resulting in
order to predict the forces acting on K+ ions when a dynamic equilibrium (This process is called
a potassium channel is open. “dynamic” because there is a constant movement
We know that the inside of the cell is of ions going in and going out, and yet it is at an
negative and K+ has a positive charge, so the “equilibrium” because there is no net movement
electrical gradient causes K+ to be attracted into of charge: the charge moving in is balanced by
the cell. We also know that the inside of the cell the charge moving out.) This exact value of the
has a relatively high concentration of K+ ions Vm is called the equilibrium potential for the
compared to the outside of the cell; therefore the ion, which is also abbreviated E where x is the
x
chemical gradient pushes K+ out of the cell. ion of interest. The equilibrium potential differs for
Since the ion concentrations across the each ion, and is described in Table 4.1.
membrane do not change significantly, but the
Extracellular
+
Electrical gradient
-70 mV
Chemical gradient +
+ +
+
+ +
+
+
+ +
Intracellular
Figure 4.7 When a potassium channel opens (blue), potassium ions (green) are acted on by two
opposing forces. They have a positive charge, which is attracted to the negatively-charged inside of
the cell (electrical gradient). At the same time, they are at a higher concentration inside the cell, which
causes them to want to move outside of the cell (chemical gradient). This process is at equilibium.
4-7
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Ion Abbreviation Concentration outside [X] Concentration inside [X]
o i
Sodium Na+ 140 mM 15 mM
Potassium K+ 5 mM 150 mM
Chloride Cl- 120 mM 10 mM
Calcium Ca2+ 1 mM 100 nM = 0.1 µM
Magnesium Mg2+ 2 mM 0.5 mM
Miscellaneous anions A- 20 mM 100 mM
Table 4.8 Charged ions are unequally distributed across the cell membrane. Typical concentrations of
ions in a mammalian neuron.
4-8
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

4.3 Calculating E and the Nernst equation
x
Even though the equilibrium are closer to 310 K. This term is included in
potential (E ) for each ion can be determined the equation since all biological processes are
x
experimentally, it is also possible to calculate E temperature dependent, especially those at the
x
using a mathematical equation called the Nernst level of molecular machinery.
equation. By understanding the Nernst equation, z is the electrical charge of the ion. For
you can predict the direction that ions will move sodium and potassium, z is +1, for chloride or
when an ion channel opens given various monovalent anions z is -1, and for divalent cations
conditions. The Nernst equation is as follows: like calcium and magnesium, z is +2. This term
is essential since the Nernst potential is used to
predict the direction of ion movement based on
the charge of the ion. This value represents the
influence exerted by the electrical gradient.
Equation 4.9 The Nernst equation calculates the F is the Faraday constant which has a
reversal potential for a given ion x. value of 96,485 Coulombs / mol.
[x] and [x] represent the concentration
o i
E is the equilibrium potential. As a
x of ion x outside the cell and inside the cell,
potential, it has units in volts, usually measured
respectively. Their units are generally in mM, but
in millivolts. When a cell’s membrane potential
these units cancel out in the equation. These
is exactly at this E , the ion is at equilibrium:
x values represent the forces acting on the ions by
ion movement into the cell is matched by ion
the chemical gradient.
movement out of the cell. E is sometimes also
x The Nernst equation has many complex
called the reversal potential, because once the
constants and terms, so neuroscientists often
cell membrane crosses from this potential, the
use the back-of-the-envelope equation as a
net movement of the ions reverses directions.
shortcut for quickly calculating the equilibrium
This value is also called the Nernst potential in
potential. This shortcut equation condenses down
honor of Walther Nernst, the Nobel prize-winning
the R and F constants, turns the natural log into a
German chemist who first developed the formula
base 10 logarithm, and assumes the calculations
to describe electrochemical reactions.
are done at physiological temperature. The
R is the ideal gas constant. It has a value
shortcut formula can be written as:
of 8.314 J / K * mol. The R term is included in the
equation because it is a way to convert between
the number of molecules and the energy that
these molecules exert.
T is the temperature in Kelvin (to convert
from Celsius into Kelvin, add 273 to the Celsius Equation 4.10 The “back-of-the-envelope”
equation is a shortcut to estimate the reversal
value. C + 273 = K). Usually, room temperature
potential for an ion x.
is around 293 K, and biological temperatures
4-9
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

The Nernst equation is able to calculate Under these conditions, the permeability for K+
the reversal potential for individual ions assuming (p ) is 1, p is 0.55, and p is 0.04. Therefore, the
K Cl Na
that the appropriate ion channels are open. resting membrane potential V will be closest to a
m
However, in neurons, not all ion channels are combination of E and E , since these two terms
K Cl
opened or closed at the same time. In a neuron dominate the GHK equation. Just as a reminder,
at rest, usually Na+ does not enter into the cells the resting membrane potential is around -70 mV,
since sodium channels are closed. K+ ions , on and E is around -80 mV while E is around -60
K Cl
the other hand, are often moving through leak mV.
channels all the time. Chloride channels are However, during an action potential
generally open as well, but they pass less current (described in section 4.4), permeability for
at rest than potassium channels do. sodium increases significantly. As p rises, the
Na
A formula called the Goldman-Hodgkin- membrane potential will shift closer towards E ,
Na
Katz equation (GHK equation) combines the which is +55 mV. The GHK equation provides
Nernst potentials of three relevant ions (Na+, a mathematical explanation for how movement
K+, and Cl-) into a single equation that, when of Na+ across the membrane causes the cell to
evaluated, gives us the value of the membrane become more positive.
potential V .
m
The GHK equation is written as:
Equation 4.11 The Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz equation is used to
calculate the membrane potential given permeability of ions and their
concentrations across the cell membrane.
When you analyze the GHK equation, you
will notice that it is essentially a combination of the
Nernst equations for the equilibrium potentials
for the three ions. The GHK equation also
introduces a new term, the value p which stands
for permeability: the ability for an ion to cross the
membrane through ion channels. Permeability
itself does not have a unit.
It is easier to think of permeability as the
“weight” of each equilibrium potential. The higher
the permeability for a given ion, the closer the V
m
is to the E for that ion. For example, consider the
x
value of the GHK equation for neurons at rest.
4-10
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

4.4 The action potential
Depolarization
-65 mV
-70 mV
Hyperpolarization
-75 mV
Figure 4.12 When the neuronal membrane
potential becomes more positive above the resting
membrane potential, we call it depolarization.
When the membrane potential becomes more
negative, we say it is hyperpolarized.
4-11
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com
)Vm(
laitnetop
enarbmeM
The action potential is a short-lasting
(1 or 2 milliseconds), temporary change in
membrane potential that can travel down the
length of the axon. Action potentials are the main
method of communication that neurons use,
and each action potential triggers the release
of neurotransmitters at the axon terminal of a
chemical synapse. Action potentials are all-or-
nothing responses, meaning that only a large
change in potential will be able to pass the signal
forward, but a small, sub-threshold change in V
m
will not. Sub-threshold changes in V are called
m
graded potentials.
During an action potential, the membrane
potential deviates from the resting membrane
potential of around -70 mV (this value can range of ions, predominantly sodium and potassium,
from -90 mV to -50 mV, depending on the type across the cell membrane through voltage-gated
of neuron) to positive potentials. When Vm ion channels. An action potential takes place in 5
goes from negative to a more positive potential, steps, some of which overlap in duration.
this change is described as a depolarization.
Likewise, when Vm changes to a value that is
more negative, it is called a hyperpolarization.
The action potential has a very characteristic
shape: a rapid depolarization, followed by a
prolonged hyperpolarization, before repolarizing
and slowly returning to the resting membrane
potential over the next few milliseconds.
Cells regularly receive many inputs at
once. To trigger an action potential, the sum of
the inputs must be sufficiently depolarizing to
bring the Vm to a value that is more positive than
the action potential threshold. For an average
neuron, the action potential threshold is around
-55 mV. Anything less than the action potential
threshold will fail to send the signal forward.
The change in membrane potential seen
in an action potential is driven by the movement
)Vm(
laitnetop
enarbmeM
Suprathreshold
+50 mV depolarization
0 mV
-50 mV Threshold
-70 mV
Subthreshold
depolarization
-100 mV
Figure 4.13 If the depolarization exceeds the
action potential threshold, roughly -55 mV, the
neuron will fire an action potential (green).

1. Depolarization from incoming which are called excitatory post synaptic
neurons potentials (EPSPs), while release of inhibitory
Presynaptic neurons that release neurotransmitters cause small hyperpolarizations,
neurotransmitters onto dendrites cause a small or inhibitory post synaptic potentials (IPSPs).
amount of ion movement via postsynaptic ligand- These PSPs are characterized by a fast but
gated ion channels. These small deviations in small rising phase where the V changes quickly
m
membrane voltage are called postsynaptic followed by a slower decay phase where the V
m
potentials, or PSPs. Release of excitatory resets back to resting potential.
neurotransmitters causes small depolarizations Usually, a single EPSP only causes a
small amount of depolarization that isn’t sufficient
for bringing Vm above the threshold potential.
Reaching the threshold often requires multiple
EPSPs. Multiple EPSPs are added together in
one of two ways: spatial summation and temporal
summation. Spatial summation happens when
two small EPSPs from two adjacent inputs are
triggered. Temporal summation occurs when
multiple EPSPs from the same input occur close
together in time. Each individual EPSP has a
normal decay period, and adding a second EPSP
during that decay period causes the two to add
Figure 4.14 Activation of excitatory inputs (left) together, which may now be large enough to bring
causes depolarization, while activation of inhibitory Vm above the action potential threshold. When a
inputs (right) can cause hyperpolarization. large enough total depolarization of membrane
potential reaches the soma, an action potential is
initiated at the axon hillock.
0 mV
-50 mV Threshold
-70 mV
Figure 4.15 Spatial summation is the addition of signals from two inputs adjacent to each other (left).
Temporal summation is the addition of two signals close together in time (right).
4-12
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

2. Opening of voltage-gated Na+ Na+ movement across the cell membrane into the
channels cell causes the V to depolarize to very positive
m
At rest, the voltage-gated ion channels are potentials. The peak of the action potential can
almost all closed. But as the V depolarizes, the reach +40 mV.
m
channels are more likely to open. At this point,
we use our understanding of the electrochemical 3. Opening of voltage-gated K+ channels
gradient to predict the movement of Na+ ions. Embedded in the cell membranes are
The positively charged sodium ions are drawn other voltage-gated channels that are selective
to the negative potential on the inside of the for K+ rather than Na+. Like the voltage-gated Na+
cell, and the ions move from the area of high channels, these K+ channels begin to open when
concentration (outside the cell) to an area of lower the cell starts to depolarize, allowing K+ ions to
concentration (inside the cell). Both forces are in move across the cell membrane.
favor of Na+ entering the cell when the voltage- When the cell has depolarized to about
gated sodium channels open, and this movement +40 mV, we can use our knowledge of the
of positive charges into the cell causes further electrochemical gradient to make predictions
depolarization. about what happens to K+ ions. The positive
+ +
+
Closed state Open state Inactivated state
Resting membrane potential Small depolarization Large depolarization
Very low conductance High conductance No conductance
Figure 4.16 Voltage-gated Na+ channels have a molecular structure that allows the channel to
temporarily change structure in response to membrane voltage. A small depolarization to -50 mV causes
the channels to open, while a large depolarization above -30 mV causes the channels to inactivate,
blocking further sodium currents.
4-13
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

potential inside the neuron repels the K+ ions
(electrical gradient), and the relatively high Clinical connection: Chronic pain
concentration of K+ inside the cell pushes K+ Nociception is a complex sensation that
out of the cell (chemical gradient). In total, the nervous system detects rapidly. Pain is the
both of these forces act on the K+ ions to perception that the body is experiencing some
leave the neuron. Movement of positive kind of injury or noxious stimulus, so pain triggers
charge carriers out of the cell makes the a reflex that causes the person to withdraw from
interior of the cell (and V ) more negative. the painful stimulus, which decreases the severity
m
K+ movement through the voltage-gated of the damage. Pain can also create memories
potassium channels causes the cells to that discourage people from future contact with
become more negative than the resting pain-inducing situations.
membrane potential. When we experience a noxious stimulus,
that information is sent towards the central
4. Inactivation of voltage-
nervous system by means of action potentials.
gated Na+ channels
And in most cases, the detection of pain is a
Voltage-gated Na+ channels have
healthy, protective sensation.
a very complex molecular structure. In
There are, however, some people with a
addition to having a pore through which
dysregulation in their somatosensory systems
ions can move across the cell membrane,
that cause them to experience pain even in the
they have an inactivation gate that can
absence of injurious stimuli, a condition called
block the flow of sodium ions. When the cell
allodynia. Although we still don’t understand what
membrane reaches a positive potential, the
causes allodynia, it is known that some change in
inactivation gate closes, thus preventing
voltage-gated sodium channel properties causes
further movement of excitatory, depolarizing
an increase of excitability of pain-sensing neurons
Na+ ions.
is increased.
These voltage-gated Na+ channels
undergo the inactivation process very
milliseconds to deactivate.
rapidly, often times faster than a millisecond.
When these K+ channels deactivate, the
5. Deactivation of voltage-gated hyperpolarizing current stops, which causes the
K+ channels membrane potential to gradually return to the
In this last step of the action potential, the equilibrium of resting potential.
main current flow is an outward current as the
positively-charged K+ ions are driven out of the In summary, you can also think of the
cell through voltage-gated K+ channels by the shape of the action potential as consisting of
electrochemical gradient. When positive charges three phases.
leave the cell, the interior once again becomes 1. Depolarization. The upwards deflection
more negative. (-70 mV to +40mV) of the action potential that
Unlike the voltage-gated Na+ channels, lasts for half a millisecond. Vm becomes more
the process of deactivation is much slower. positive because of Na+ ions that enter the cell
On average, it may take these channels a few through the voltage-gated sodium channels. At
4-14
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Depolarization Repolarization Afterhyperpolarization
0 mV
-50 mV
-70 mV
Voltage-gated
Na+ channels
Closed Open Inactivated Closed
Voltage-gated
K+ channels
Closed Opening Open Deactivating
Figure 4.17 Voltage-gated ion channels open, inactivate, and deactivate at different times during the
action potential.
this step, the voltage-gated potassium channels 3. Afterhyperpolarization. The slow
also start to open. return back to the resting membrane potential
2. Repolarization. The rapid downwards (-70 mV to -80 mV and back to -70 mV ) that can
deflection (+40 mV to -70 mV), also lasting for last for a few milliseconds. This return back to
about half a millisecond. Here, the voltage-gated the equilibrium of the resting state is due to the
sodium channels have almost all inactivated, and gradual deactivation of voltage-gated potassium
positively-charged K+ ions are being driven out channels.
of the cell through the voltage-gated potassium Ions moving across the membrane
channels. As positive charges leave the cell, V change the membrane potential. The best way
m
becomes more negative. to think about the change in V in response to
m
4-15
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

is a depolarization. During the repolarization
Randomness in ion channel properties phase, when the voltage-gated K+ channels
Voltage-gated ion channels do not follow open, the potential across the cell membrane
a precise “if-then” flowchart in determining when now shifts towards the equilibrium potential for
to open, inactivate, or deactivate. Rather, ion K+, which is close to -80 mV.
channels are very probabilistic in nature. For The steps of the action potential can
example, consider as a voltage-gated sodium also be thought of in mathematical terms by
channel changes from the closed state to the examining the variables of the GHK equation.
open state. A single channel like this might show As permeability for a given ion increases, it
probabilistic behavior as follows: at -70 mV, there shifts the balance of V more heavily towards
m
is a 0.1% chance to open. At -30 mV, there is now a the equilibrium potential of that specific ion. So,
50% chance to open. At +20 mV, there is a 99.9% during the depolarization phase of the action
chance to transition to the open configuration. potential when the voltage-gated sodium
Likewise, these channels also transition channels open, the permeability term for
from the open state to the inactive state on a sodium (p ) increases to as high as 20, which
Na
probabilistic basis as well, with the greatest causes Vm to move towards E (+55 mV).
Na
probability of inactivating at depolarized And during the repolarization phase, voltage-
potentials. gated potassium channels open, while the
voltage-gated sodium channels are inactived.
diagram here
When this happens, p increases, p drops to
K Na
zero, and as a result, the V shifts towards the
m
equilibrium potential for potassium (-80 mV).
In the moments following the beginning
of an action potential, there is a time window
where a second action potential cannot be
fired. This time window, about half a millisecond
in duration, is called the absolute refractory
period. On a molecular level, the absolute
refractory period exists because the voltage-
gated sodium channels are inactivated,
which prevents them from being able to pass
any more inward excitatory current. The
absolute refractory period may last for up to a
millisecond.
ion movement is to consider the equilibrium A few milliseconds after the end of the
potential of each individual ion that is moving. absolute refractory period begins a phase called
For example, E is +55 mV. When a voltage- the relative refractory period. During this
Na
gated sodium channel opens and Na+ ions are phase, it is more difficult to fire an action potential
able to move across the cell membrane, the compared to the resting condition. At the level of
membrane potential shifts towards E , which the receptors, the relative refractory period exists
Na
4-16
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

for two main reasons. First, only some of the
voltage-gated sodium channels have “reset” from
their inactive state. Second, many of the voltage-
gated potassium channels are still in the open
state, which allows the movement of K+ ions,
causing the neuron to rest at a more negative
potential. Also, increased movement of K+ ions
hinders depolarization, as the GHK equation
demonstrates, since potassium movement
pulls membrane potential closer towards the
equilibrium potential for K+. This relative refractory
period lasts as long as the afterhyperpolarization,
and therefore exists on a gradient: the sooner
after the repolarization phase of the first action
potential, the more difficult it will be to reach
threshold for a second action potential.
4-17
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

4.5 Movement of the action potential
Up to this point, we have only considered is the next section of membrane. When they do
a single piece of cell membrane and how it so, the next patch of the membrane becomes
responds during an action potential. For an depolarized. This depolarization causes the next
action potential to travel from the axon hillock set of channels to open, which results in even
to the axon terminal, this temporary change in more sodium influx. From here, the process
V must physically move down the length of the repeats down the axon. The action potential is a
m
axon. The ability for the action potential to travel chain reaction that starts at the axon hillock and
is made possible because the Na+ ions that enter doesn’t stop until the axon terminal.
through voltage-gated sodium channels are not An action potential is like a wave. It only
restricted to the cytoplasmic volume beneath moves in one direction, and there are two main
the ion channels. These Na+ ions behave just reasons why:
like any other substances that are in an area of 1. First, sodium ions move down their
high concentration: they move towards areas of concentration gradient. The Na+ ions that enter
low concentration. As Na+ rushes into the cell, through a voltage-gated sodium channel are less
they follow the chemical gradient and quickly likely to want to move in the reverse direction,
move toward areas of low concentration, which since this area currently has a relatively high Na+
Voltage-gated Na Voltage-gated Na
channels open channels closed
Na+
Na+
Na+
Node of Ranvier
Schwann cell
Axon hillock
Synapse
Saltatory conduction
Figure 4.19 Movement of an action potential down a myelinated axon relies on saltatory conduction.
4-18
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

Analgesia and motor signaling
A trip to the dental office sometimes
requires an injection of an analgesic like
lidocaine before the dentist performs any
otherwise-painful procedures. On a molecular
scale, lidocaine is an inhibitor of voltage-gated
sodium channels. By blocking these channels,
lidocaine prevents action potentials from
traveling up the afferent pathway, preventing
incoming sensory inputs from the teeth and
gums from reaching the central nervous system.
When these signals are blocked, we don’t feel
any drilling.
Just as incoming signals can be inhibited
through voltage-gated sodium channel inhibitors, so can outbound signals – sometimes with
deadly consequences. Through evolution, nature came across a variety of voltage-gated sodium
channel inhibitors that function as poisons to prevent predation. Because the efferent pathway is
used to signal components of the motor system, blocking downward signals can lead to paralysis.
One family of fishes, the pufferfish, may have a very high concentration of a deadly voltage-gated
sodium channel inhibitor called tetrodotoxin, or TTX. This toxin is produced by a bacteria that
live symbiotically in pufferfish organs. Ingestion of TTX prevents neurons from communicating.
One efferent signaling pathway, the phrenic nerve, signals the diaphragm to move up and down.
Without proper medical treatment, people exposed to doses as small as 1 milligram of TTX can die
of respiratory failure in hours.
Despite these tremendous risks, pufferfish is a delicacy in Japan. The dish, called fugu, can
cause numbness of the lips and even a mild intoxication.
concentration. Instead, they will move towards The role of myelin
the area with a low concentration of ions, which Previously, in discussing the cellular
is the forward direction. anatomy of the neurons, we described myelin,
Synapse 2. Secondly, the previous patch of layers of lipid that are sometimes thickly wrapped
membrane is in the absolute refractory period, around the axon of the neuron. Myelin increases
which makes it impossible for an action potential to conduction velocity, the speed at which an
travel backwards. During this time, many voltage- action potential travels down the length of the
gated sodium channels are still inactivated, and axon. Myelin works by physically blocking leak
most voltage-gated potassium channels are potassium channels in the cell membrane.
open. By covering these channels, positive charges
4-19
Downloaded from www.austinlim.com Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com

become unable to exit the cell, which causes the
signal to move more rapidly.
A myelinated axon still requires some
influx of sodium ions for the signal to travel,
however. This influx occurs at the nodes of
Ranvier, the unmyelinated segments of the
axon. These areas are very dense with voltage-
gated sodium channels. Because the changes
in electrical charge are detected at intervals,
we sometimes say that the signal is passed by
saltatory conduction (saltare is the Italian word
for “jump”).
In this chapter, we described the molecular
and cellular underpinnings of the action potential,
the main method of signaling that the nervous
system uses for communication. In the following
chapter, we will explain how neurons talk to
one another using those electrical signals
in combination with chemical signals called
neurotransmitters.
The Open Neuroscience Initiative is funded by a grant from the Vincentian Endowment Fund of
DePaul University.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International License.
4-20
Open Neuroscience Initiative Downloaded from www.austinlim.com



1/7/25, 2:28 AM Synapic Transmission at the Skeletal Neuromuscular Junction (Section 1, Chapter 4) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook f…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 1: Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology
Search
Chapter 4: Synaptic Transmission and the Skeletal Neuromuscular Junction
John H. Byrne, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School at Houston
Revised Summer 2023
The synapse is a specialized structure that allows one neuron
SSyynnaappttiicc TTrraannssmmiissssiioonn aatt tthhee SSkkeelleettaall NNeeuurroommuussccuullaarr JJuunncc……
to communicate with another neuron or a muscle cell. There
are billions of nerve cells in the brain and each nerve cell
can make and receive up to 10,000 synaptic connections with
other nerve cells. Also, the strength of the synapse is
modifiable. Changes in the strength of synapses endow the
nervous system with the ability to store information.
4.1 Anatomy of the Neuromuscular
Junction
The synapse for which most is known is the one formed
between a spinal motor neuron and a skeletal muscle cell.
Historically, it has been studied extensively because it is
relatively easy to analyze. However, the basic properties of
synaptic transmission at the skeletal neuromuscular junction
are very similar to the process of synaptic transmission in the Video of lecture
central nervous system.
c 2000 UTHSCH
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter04.html 1/8

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Synapic Transmission at the Skeletal Neuromuscular Junction (Section 1, Chapter 4) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook f…
Figure 4.1 (see enlarged view)
Consequently, an understanding of this synapse leads to an understanding of the others. Therefore, we will first discuss the process
of synaptic transmission at the skeletal neuromuscular junction.
The features of the synaptic junction at the neuromuscular junction are shown in the figure at left. Skeletal muscle fibers are
innervated by motor neurons whose cell bodies are located in the ventral horn of the spinal cord. The terminal region of the axon
gives rise to very fine processes that run along skeletal muscle cells. Along these processes are specialized structures known as
synapses. The particular synapse made between a spinal motor neuron and skeletal muscle cell is called the motor endplate
because of its specific structure.
The synapse at the neuromuscular junction has three characteristic features of chemical synapses in the nervous system. First,
there is a distinct separation between the presynaptic and the postsynaptic membrane. The space between the two is known as the
synaptic cleft. The space tells us there must be some intermediary signaling mechanism between the presynaptic neuron and the
postsynaptic neuron in order to have information flow across the synaptic cleft. Second, there is a characteristic high density of
small spherical vesicles. These synaptic vesicles contain neurotransmitter substances. Synapses are also associated with a high
density of mitochondria. Third, in most cases, there is a characteristic thickening of the postsynaptic membrane, which is due at
least in part to the fact that the postsynaptic membrane has a high density of specialized receptors that bind the chemical
transmitter substances released from the presynaptic neuron. Additional details on the morphological features of synaptic junctions
is provided in Chapter 8 and Chapter 10.
4.2 Physiology of Synaptic Transmission at the Neuromuscular Junction
Figure 4.2
The figure at the right illustrates in a very schematic way how it is possible to study the physiology of synaptic transmission at the
skeletal neuromuscular junction in great detail. A piece of muscle and its attached nerve are placed in a small experimental
chamber filled with an appropriate Ringer solution. The resting potential of the muscle cell is recorded with a microelectrode.
Electrodes are also placed on the surface of the nerve axon. Brief electric shocks cause action potentials to be initiated, which
propagate to the synaptic terminal.
The figure below illustrates two types of potential changes that were recorded in such an isolated nerve-muscle preparation. The
experiment also illustrates the properties of a powerful drug, curare, which has proven to be very useful in studying the process of
synaptic transmission at the skeletal neuromuscular junction. Part A illustrates the sequence of potential changes recorded in the
muscle cell as a result of stimulating the motor axon. The arrow indicates the point in time when the shock is delivered to the
motor axon. Note that there is a quiescent period of time after the shock. The delay is due to the time it takes for the action
potential in the motor axon to propagate from its site of initiation. After the delay, there are two types of potentials recorded in the
muscle cell. First, there is a relatively slowly changing potential that will be the focus of the following discussion. If that slow initial
potential is sufficiently large, as it normally is in skeletal muscle cells, a second potential, an action potential, is elicited in the
muscle cell.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter04.html 2/8

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Synapic Transmission at the Skeletal Neuromuscular Junction (Section 1, Chapter 4) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook f…
Figure 4.3
Action potentials in skeletal muscle cells are due to ionic mechanisms similar to those discussed previously. Specifically, there is a
voltage-dependent change in Na+ permeability followed by a delayed increase in K+ permeability. (For smooth muscle cells and
cardiac muscle cells the ionic mechanisms are different, however.)
The underlying event that triggers the action potential can be revealed by taking advantage of curare, an arrow poison used by
some South American Indians. A low dose of curare (Part B) reduces the underlying event, but it is still not sufficiently reduced to
fall below threshold. If a somewhat higher dose of curare is delivered (Part C), the slow underlying event becomes subthreshold.
The underlying signal is known as the endplate potential (EPP) because it is a potential change recorded at the motor endplate.
Generally, it is known as an excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP).
Curare blocks the endplate potential because it is a competitive inhibitor of acetylcholine (ACh), the transmitter released at the
presynaptic terminal. Curare does not block the voltage-dependent Na+ conductance or the voltage-dependent K+ conductance that
underlies the muscle action potential. Curare affects the stimulus (the EPSP) which normally leads to the initiation of the muscle
action potential. An animal that is poisoned with curare will asphyxiate because the process of neuromuscular transmission at
respiratory muscles is blocked.
Normally, the magnitude of the endplate potential is quite large. Indeed, the amplitude of the endplate potential is about 50 mV,
but only about 30 mV is needed to reach threshold. The extra 20 mV is called the safety factor. Therefore, even if the endplate
potential were to become somewhat smaller (e.g., 40 mV in amplitude) because of fatigue, the EPP would reach threshold and the
one-to-one relationship between an action potential in the motor axon and an action potential in the muscle cell would be
preserved.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter04.html 3/8

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Synapic Transmission at the Skeletal Neuromuscular Junction (Section 1, Chapter 4) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook f…
Figure 4.4
4.3 Propagation of the EPP
What are the properties of the EPP and how does it compare with the properties of the action potential?
Is the endplate potential due to a voltage-dependent change in Na+ and K+ permeabilities like the action potential?
Is the endplate potential propagated in an all-or-nothing fashion like the action potential?
The figure on the left illustrates an experiment that examines the propagation of the endplate potential. The muscle fiber is impaled
repeatedly with electrodes at 1 mm intervals. (Note that the endplate potential is small because this experiment is done in the
presence of a low concentration of curare so the endplate potential can be recorded without the complications of triggering an
action potential.) The endplate potential is not propagated in an all-or-nothing fashion. It does spread along the muscle, but it does
so with decrement. Thus, the spread of the endplate potential from its site of initiation to other sites along the muscle cell occurs
passively and with decrement, just as a subthreshold potential change in one portion of the axon spreads along the axon, or just as
a change in temperature at one point on a metal rod spreads along the rod.
4.4 Overview of the Sequence of Events Underlying the EPP
Figure 4.5
What are the other steps in the process of chemical synaptic transmission? Figure 4.5 provides an overview. A nerve action
potential that is initiated in the cell body of a spinal motor neuron propagates out the ventral roots and eventually invades the
synaptic terminals of the motor neurons. As a result of the action potential, the chemical transmitter acetylcholine (ACh) is released
into the synaptic cleft. ACh diffuses across the synaptic cleft and binds to special receptors on the postsynaptic or the postjunctional
membrane. The binding of ACh to its receptors produces a conformational change in a membrane channel that is specifically
permeable to both Na+ and K+. As a result of an increase in Na+ and K+ permeability, there is a depolarization of the postsynaptic
membrane. That depolarization is called the endplate potential or more generally the EPSP. If the EPSP is sufficiently large, as it
normally is at the neuromuscular junction, it leads to initiation of an action potential in the muscle cell. The action potential initiates
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter04.html 4/8

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Synapic Transmission at the Skeletal Neuromuscular Junction (Section 1, Chapter 4) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook f…
the process of excitation contraction coupling and the development of tension. The duration of the endplate potential is about 10
msec.
Two factors control the duration of the EPSP at the neuromuscular junction. First, ACh is removed by diffusion. Second, a substance
in the synaptic cleft, called acetylcholinesterase (AChE), hydrolyzes or breaks down ACh. AChE is one of the most efficient
enzymes known. A single molecule of AChE can hydrolyze 600,000 molecules of ACh per minute.
4.5 Role of AChE
Figure 4.6
An important family of substances, one of which is neostigmine, inhibits the action of AChE. Neostigmine blocks the action of AChE,
and thereby makes the endplate potential larger and longer in duration. This figure illustrates two endplate potentials. One was
recorded in saline and curare and a second recorded after neostigmine was added to the solution. (Curare is added so that the
properties of the EPP can be studied without triggering an action potential in the muscle cell.) After applying neostigmine the
endplate potential is much larger and longer in duration.
4.6a Myasthenia Gravis
Myasthenia gravis is associated with severe muscular weakness because of a decrease in the number of acetylcholine receptors in
the muscle cell. If the endplate potential is smaller, the endplate potential will fail to reach threshold. If it fails to reach threshold,
there will be no action potential in the muscle cell and no contraction of the muscle, which causes muscular weakness. Neostigmine
and other inhibitors of AChE are used to treat patients with myasthenia gravis. These agents make the amount of acetylcholine that
is released more effectively reach the remaining acetylcholine receptors.
4.6b Nerve Agents
Although inhibitors of AChE have important theraputic value, some inhibitors have been, and are still used as poisions. Some AChE
inhibitors such as Soman and Sarin form a fairly irreversible block of AChE. This block leads to extreme levels of ACh in the synaptic
cleft. Individuals so posioned die from seizures and muscle spasticity including respiratory muscles.
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 4.7
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter04.html 5/8

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Synapic Transmission at the Skeletal Neuromuscular Junction (Section 1, Chapter 4) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook f…
4.7 Iontophoresis of ACh
Iontophoresis is an interesting technique that can be used to further test the hypothesis that ACh is the neurotransmitter substance
at the neuromuscular junction. If ACh is the transmitter that is released by this synapse, one would predict that it should be
possible to substitute artificial application of the transmitter for the normal release of the transmitter. Since ACh is a positively
charged molecule, it can be forced out of a microelectrode to simulate the release of ACh from a presynaptic terminal.
Figure 4.8
Indeed, minute amounts of ACh can be applied to the vicinity of the neuromuscular junction. Figure 4.8 compares an EPP produced
by stimulation of the motor axon and the response to ejections of ACh. The potential change looks nearly identical to the endplate
potential produced by the normal release of ACh. This experiment provides experimental support for the concept that ACh is the
natural transmitter at this synapse.
The response to the ejection of ACh has some other interesting properties that are all consistent with the cholinergic nature of the
synapse at the skeletal neuromuscular junction. Neostigmine makes the response to the iontophoresis of ACh longer and larger.
Curare reduces the response because it competes with the normal binding of ACh. If ACh is ejected into the muscle cell, nothing
happens because the receptors for acetylcholine are not in the inside; they are on the outside of the muscle cell. Application of
acetylcholine to regions of the muscle away from the end-plate produces no response because the receptors for the ACh are
concentrated at the synaptic region.
To test your understanding so far, consider how an agent such as TTX would affect the generation of both an EPP and the response
of a muscle fiber to the iontophoretic application of ACh? TTX has no effect on the response to ACh, but it does block the EPP. The
reason the response to ACh is unaffected is clear, but many expect that if there is no effect here, there should be no effect on the
EPP either. Tetrodotoxin does not affect the binding of acetylcholine to the receptors and therefore will not affect the response to
direct application of ACh. However, tetrodotoxin will affect the ability of an action potential to be elicited in the motor axon. If an
action potential cannot be elicited in the motor axon, it cannot cause the release of transmitter. Thus, tetrodotoxin would totally
abolish the EPP. The block would not be due to a block of ACh receptors, but rather to a block of some step prior to the release of
the transmitter.
4.8 Ionic Mechanisms of the EPP
Bernard Katz and his colleagues were pioneers in investigating mechanisms of synaptic transmission at the neuromuscular junction.
They suggested that the channel opened by ACh was one that had equal permeability to both Na+ and K+. Because it was equally
permeable to Na+ and K+, Katz suggested that, as a result of the opening of these channels, the membrane potential would move
toward 0 mV. (A value of alpha in the GHK equation equal to one, which when substituted into the equation, yields a potential of
about 0 mV.)
Figure 4.9
The experiment shown in the figure on the left tests that concept. The muscle cell has been penetrated with a recording electrode
as well as another electrode that can be connected to a suitable source of potential in order to artificially change the membrane
potential. Normally, the membrane potential is about -80 mV [Skeletal muscle cells have higher (more negative) resting potentials
than most nerve cells.] Again, a small amount of curare is added so that the EPP is small. Katz noticed in these experiments that
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter04.html 6/8

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Synapic Transmission at the Skeletal Neuromuscular Junction (Section 1, Chapter 4) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook f…
the size of the EPP changed dramatically depending upon the potential of the muscle cell. If the membrane potential is moved to 0
mV, no potential change is recorded whatsoever. If the membrane potential is made +30 mV, the EPP is inverted. So three different
stimuli produce endplate potentials that are very different from each other.
The lack of a response when the potential is at 0 mV is particularly informative. Consider why no potential change is recorded.
Presumably, the transmitter is being released and binding to the receptors. The simple explanation for a lack of potential change is
that the potential at which the opening of ACh channels are trying to reach has already been achieved. If the membrane potential is
made more positive than 0 mV, then the EPP is inverted. No matter what the potential, the change in permeability tends to move
the membrane potential towards 0 mV! If the resting potential is more negative than 0 mV, there is an upward deflection. If it is
more positive, there is a downward deflection. If it is already at 0 mV, there is no deflection.
Na+ Na+
Transmitter
Na+ K+
Na+
K+ Receptor
Na+
Pore
Cytoplasm
K+
K+ K+
K+
PLAY
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 4.10
This potential is also called the reversal potential, because it is the potential at which the sign of the synaptic potential reverses.
The experiment indicates that, as a result of ACh binding to receptors, specific channels become equally permeable to Na+ and K+.
This permeability change tends to move the membrane potential from wherever it is initially towards a new potential of 0 mV.
Why does the normal endplate potential never actually reach 0 mV? One reason is that the sequence of permeability changes that
underlie the action potential "swamp out" the changes produced by the EPP. But even if an action potential was not triggered, the
EPP still would not reach 0 mV. This is because the ACh channels are only a small fraction of the total number of channels in muscle
fibers. The K+ channels that endow a muscle cell with its resting potential are present as well. Their job is to try to maintain the cell
at the resting potential.
The channel opened by ACh is a member of a general class of channels called ligand-gated channels or ionotropic receptors. As
illustrated in Figure 4.10, the transmitter binding site is part of the channel itself. As a result of transmitter binding to the receptor
(generally two molecules are necessary), there is a conformational change in the protein allowing a pore region to open and ions to
flow down their electrochemical gradients. Additional details of the channel are presented in Chapter 11.
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D
An endplate potential in a skeletal muscle cell could in principle be produced by a decreased
permeability to which of the following ions(s)? (Assume that there is a finite initial permeability to
each of the ions listed below and that physiological concentration gradients are present.):
A. Na+
B. Na+ and Ca2+
C. Ca2+
D. K+
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter04.html 7/8

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Synapic Transmission at the Skeletal Neuromuscular Junction (Section 1, Chapter 4) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook f…
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter04.html 8/8



1/7/25, 2:28 AM Propagation of the Action Potential (Section 1, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Dep…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 1: Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology
Search
Chapter 3: Propagation of the Action Potential
John H. Byrne, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
Revised Summer 2023
3.1 Changes in the Spatial Distribution of Charge
Once an action potential is initiated at one point in the nerve
cell, how does it propagate to the synaptic terminal region in an
PPrrooppaaggaattiioonn ooff AAccttiioonn PPootteennttiiaallss
all-or-nothing fashion?
Figure 3.1 shows a schematic diagram of an axon and the
charge distributions that would be expected to occur along the
membrane of that axon. Positive charges exist on the outside of
the axon and negative charges on the inside. Now consider the
consequences of delivering some stimulus to a point in the
middle of the axon. If the depolarization is sufficiently large,
voltage-dependent sodium channels will be opened, and an
action potential will be initiated.
Video of lecture
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 3.1
Consider for the moment "freezing" the action potential at its peak value. Its peak value now will be about +40 mV inside with
respect to the outside. Unlike charges attract, so the positive charge will move to the adjacent region of the membrane. As the
charge moves to the adjacent region of the membrane, the adjacent region of the membrane will depolarize. If it depolarizes
sufficiently, as it will, voltage-dependent sodium channels in the adjacent region of the membrane will be opened and a "new"
action potential will be initiated. This charge distribution will then spread to the next region and initiate other "new" action
potentials. One way of viewing this process is with a thermal analogue. You can think of an axon as a piece of wire coated with
gunpowder (the gunpowder is analogous to the sodium channels). If a sufficient stimulus (heat) is delivered to the wire, the
gunpowder will ignite, generate heat, and the heat will spread along the wire to adjacent regions and cause the gunpowder in the
adjacent regions to ignite.
3.2 Determinants of Propagation Velocity
A great variability is found in the velocity of the propagation of action potentials. In fact, the propagation velocity of the action
potentials in nerves can vary from 100 meters per second (223 miles per hour) to less than a tenth of a meter per second (0.22
miles per hour). Why do some axons propagate information very rapidly and others slowly? In order to understand how this process
works, it is necessary to consider two so-called passive properties of membranes, the time constant and the space or length
constant. Why are these called passive properties? They have nothing to do with any of the voltage-dependent conductances
discussed earlier. They have nothing to do with any pumps or exchangers. They are intrinsic properties of all biological membranes.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter03.html 1/5

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Propagation of the Action Potential (Section 1, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Dep…
Figure 3.2
Time Constant. First, consider a thermal analogue. Place a block of metal at 10oC on a hotplate at 100oC. How would the
temperature change? It will increase from its initial value of 10oC to a final value of 100oC. But the temperature will not change
instantly. In fact, it would change as an exponential function of time. An analogous situation occurs in nerve cells, when they
receive an instantaneous stimulus. The figure at right represents an idealized nerve cell. The recording electrode initially measures
a potential of -60 mV (the resting potential). At some point in time (time 0), the switch is closed. The switch closure occurs
instantaneously and as a result of the instantaneous closure, instantaneous current flows through the circuit. (This is equivalent to
slamming the block of metal on the hotplate.) Note that despite the fact that this stimulus changes instantly, the change in
potential does not occur instantaneously. It takes time for the potential to change from its initial value of -60 mV to its final value of
-50 mV. There is a total of 10 mV depolarization, but the change occurs as an exponential function of time.
There is a convenient index of how rapidly exponential functions change with time. The index is denoted by the symbol τ and called
the time constant. It is defined as the amount of time it takes for the change in potential to reach 63% of its final value. (Why
63%?) In this example, the potential changes from -60 to -50 and the 63% value is -53.7 mV. Thus, the time constant is 10 msec.
The smaller the time constant, the more rapid will be the change in response to a stimulus. Therefore, if this neuron had a time
constant of 5 msec, then in 5 msec the membrane potential would reach -53.7 mV. The time constant is analogous to the 0 to 60
rating of a high performance car; the lower the 0 to 60 rating, the faster the car. The lower the time constant, the faster or more
rapidly a membrane will respond to a stimulus. The effects of the time constant on propagation velocity will become clear below.
The time constant is a function of two properties of membranes, the membrane resistence (R ) and the membrane capacitance
m
(C ). R is the inverse of the permeability; the higher the permeability, the lower the resistance, and vice versa. Membranes, like
m m
the physical devices known as capacitors, can store charge. When a stimulus is delivered, it takes time to charge up the membrane
to its new value.
[Please consult a college-level textbook on physics for a review of the basic properties of resistors and capacitors. For an additional
review of resistors, capacitors and time constants and the use of hydraulic analogues to understand them see: Byrne, J. H.,
Understanding Electricity with Water, epub, Lulu.com, 2011.]
Space Constant. Consider another thermal analogue. Take a long, metal rod that is again initially at 10oC and consider the
consequences of touching one end of the rod to a hotplate which is at 100oC. (Assume that it is placed there for a certain amount
of time to allow the temperature changes to stabilize.) How would the temperature be distributed along the length of the rod?
There would be a temperature gradient along the rod because of the increasing loss of heat with greater distances from the heat
source. The temperature gradient can be described by an exponential function of distance because of the physical processes
involved.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter03.html 2/5

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Propagation of the Action Potential (Section 1, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Dep…
Figure 3.3
An analogous situation occurs in nerve cells. The figure at left represents an idealized nerve cell in which recordings are made from
different regions along the axon at 1 mm increments. The cell body is impaled with a stimulating electrode connected to a battery,
the value of which changes the potential of the cell body to -50 mV (the equivalent of putting a 10oC rod on a 100oC hot plate).
This axon, even though it initially had a spatially uniform resting potential of -60 mV, now has a potential of -50 mV in the soma
because that is the region in which the stimulus is applied. However, the potential is not -50 mV all along the axon; it varies as a
function of distance from the soma. One mm away the potential is -56 mV; at 2 mm away it is even closer to -60 mV; and far
enough along the axon, the potential of the axon is -60 mV, the resting potential. Just as there is an index for how a change in
potential changes with the time (the time constant), there is also an index denoted by the symbol λ (called the space constant or
the length constant) which is an indication of how far a potential will spread along an axon in response to a subthreshold stimulus
at another point. In Figure 3.3, the space constant or length constant is 1 mm. In 1 mm the potential will change by 63% of its
final value. If λ was greater than 1 mm, the potential would spread a greater distance. If λ was 1/2 mm, the potential would spread
less along the axon. Thus, whereas the time constant is an index of how rapidly a membrane would respond to a stimulus in time,
the space constant is an index of how well a subthreshold potential will spread along an axon as a function of distance. The space
constant is a passive property of membranes. Although it influences the rate of propagation of the action potentials, it is an
independent process. It is like the surface of a race track and the action potential is like the race car. If the surface is muddy, the
car will go slow, if it is firm and paved, the same car will be able to go much faster.
The length constant can be described in terms of the physical parameters of the axon, where d is the diameter of the axon, R is,
m
as before, the membrane resistance, the inverse of the permeability, and R is the internal resistance (resistance of the axoplasm).
i
R is an indicator of the ability of charges to move along the inner surface of the axon. A small subthreshold change in the charge
i
distribution at one point along an axon will spread along the axon, but as it does some will diffuse back out of the membrane and
some will continue to move along the axon. If the resistance of the membrane (R ) is high, less will leak out and relatively more
m
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter03.html 3/5

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Propagation of the Action Potential (Section 1, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Dep…
will move along the axon. Increasing R is like putting insulation on a metal rod and heating the rod at one end. With more
m
insulation (more resistance to heat loss to the outside of the rod), more heat will travel along the inside of the rod.
Propagation Velocity. How are the time constant and the space constant related to propagation velocity of action potentials? The
smaller the time constant, the more rapidly a depolarization will affect the adjacent region. If a depolarization more rapidly affects
an adjacent region, it will bring the adjacent region to threshold sooner. Therefore, the smaller the time constant, the more rapid
will be the propagation velocity. If the space constant is large, a potential change at one point would spread a greater distance
along the axon and bring distance regions to threshold sooner. Therefore, the greater the space constant, the more rapidly distant
regions will be brought to threshold and the more rapid will be the propagation velocity. Thus, the propagation velocity is directly
proportional to the space constant and inversely proportional to the time constant. There are separate equations that describe both
the time constant and the space constant. The insight above allows us to make a new equation that combines the two.
The equation provides insights into how it is possible for different axons to have different propagation velocities. One way of
endowing an axon with a high propagation velocity is to increase the diameter. However, there is one serious problem in changing
the propagation velocity by simply changing the diameter. To double the velocity, it is necessary to quadruple the diameter. Clearly
there must be a better way of increasing propagation velocity than by simply increasing the diameter.
Another way to increase the propagation velocity is to decrease the membrane capacitance. This can be achieved by coating axons
with a thick insulating sheath known as myelin. One potential problem with this approach is that the process of covering the axon
would cover voltage-dependent Na+ channels. If Na+ channels are occluded, it would be impossible to generate an action potential.
Instead of coating the entire axon with the myelin, only sections are coated and some regions called nodes are left bare.
3.3 Propagation in Myelinated Fibers
Figure 3.4
Propagation of action potentials in myelinated fibers is illustrated in Figure 3.4. Start with an action potential at a node on the left.
In the absence of myelin, the action potential would propagate actively through the simple mechanisms discussed above. However,
now the myelin occludes all the voltage-dependent sodium channels so the action potential can not propagate actively. (In fact,
myelinated axons do not even have sodium channels in the internodal region.) Rather, the potential change produced by the action
potential at one node spreads in the internodal region along the axon passively just as the temperature would spread along a long
metal rod. The potential spreads, but gets smaller (decrements), just as a temperature change induced at one end of a rod would
get smaller as it spreads along a rod.
Now consider the point at which the passively spreading potential reaches the next node. A "new" action potential will be initiated.
The stimulus for this action potential is the depolarization that emerges from the end of the myelin. Each node acts as a "relay
station" that renews the decremented signal. Think of the gunpowder analogue again, but this time coat the rod with some
insulation and put gunpowder only at the bare regions. Because of the insulation, a temperature change produced by the ignition of
the gunpowder will spread effectively along the metal rod. Some loss of temperature will occur but it will be sufficient to ignite the
gunpowder at the next region and the process will repeat itself.
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter03.html 4/5

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Propagation of the Action Potential (Section 1, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Dep…
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter03.html 5/5



1/7/25, 2:28 AM Ionic Mechanisms and Action Potentials (Section 1, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 1: Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology
Search
Chapter 2: Ionic Mechanisms and Action Potentials
John H. Byrne, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
Revised Summer 2023
2.1 Ionic Mechanisms of Action AAccttiioonn PPootteennttiiaall NNeeww VV1188
Potentials
Voltage-Dependent Conductances
Na+ is critical for the action potential in nerve cells. As shown in
Figure 2.1, action potentials are repeatedly initiated as the
extracellular concentration of Na+ is modified. As the
concentration of sodium in the extracellular solution is reduced,
the action potentials become smaller.
Video of lecture
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 2.1 Figure 2.2
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter02.html 1/7

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Ionic Mechanisms and Action Potentials (Section 1, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
Figure 2.2 shows the straight line predicted by the Nernst equation (assuming the membrane was exclusively permeable to Na+).
There is a good fit between the data and the values predicted by a membrane that is exclusively permeable to Na+. The experiment
gives experimental support to the notion that at the peak of the action potential, the membrane becomes highly permeable to
sodium.
However, there are some deviations between what is measured and what is predicted by the Nernst equation. Why? One reason for
the deviation is the continued K+ permeability. If there is continued K+ permeability, the membrane potential will never reach its
ideal value (the sodium equilibrium potential) because the diffusion of K+ ions tends to make the cell negative. This point can be
understood with the aid of the GHK equation.
Figure 2.3
An action potential is bounded by a region bordered on one extreme by the K+ equilibrium potential (-75 mV) and on the other
extreme by the Na+ equilibrium potential (+55 mV). The resting potential is -60 mV. Note that the resting potential is not equal to
the K+ equilibrium potential because, as discussed previously, there is a small resting Na+ permeability that makes the cell slightly
more positive than EK. In principle, any point along the trajectory of action potential can be obtained simply by varying alpha in the
GHK equation. If alpha is very large, the Na+ terms dominate, and according to the GHK equation, the membrane potential will
move towards the Na+ equilibrium potential. The peak of the action potentials approaches but does not quite reach ENa, because
the membrane retains its permeability to K+.
How is it possible for a cell to initially have a resting potential of -60 mV and then, in response to some stimulus (a brief transient
depolarization which reaches threshold), change in less than one millisecond to having a potential of approximately +40 mV? In the
1950's, Hodgkin and Huxley, two British neurobiologists, provided a hypothesis for this transition. They suggested that the
properties of some Na+ channels in nerve cells (and muscle cells) were unique in that these channels were normally closed but
could be opened by a depolarization. This simple hypothesis of voltage-dependent Na+ channels goes a long way toward explaining
the initiation of the action potential. Suppose a small depolarization causes some of the Na+ channels to open. The key point is that
the increase in Na+ permeability would produce a greater depolarization, which will lead to an even greater number of Na+
channels opening and the membrane potential becoming even more depolarized. Once some critical level is reached a positive
feedback or regenerative cycle will be initiated, causing the membrane potential to depolarize rapidly from -60 mV to a value
approaching the Na+ equilibrium potential.
Figure 2.4
In order to test the Na+ hypothesis for the initiation of the action potential, it is necessary to stabilize the membrane potential at a
number of different levels and measure the permeability at those potentials. An electronic device known as a voltage-clamp
amplifier can "clamp" or stabilize the membrane potential to any desired level and measure the resultant current required for that
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter02.html 2/7

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Ionic Mechanisms and Action Potentials (Section 1, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
stabilization. The amount of current necessary to stabilize the potential can then be used to quantify membrane permeability.
Hodgkin and Huxley clamped the membrane potential to various levels and measured the changes in Na+ conductances (an
electrical term for permeability, which for the present discussion can be used interchangeably). The more the cell is depolarized, the
greater is the Na+ conductance. Thus, the experiment provided support for the existence of voltage-dependent Na+ channels.
2.2 Na+ Inactivation
Figure 2.4 also indicates an important property of the voltage-dependent Na+ channels. Note that the permeability increases rapidly
and then, despite the fact that the membrane potential is clamped, the permeability decays back to its initial level. This
phenomenon is called inactivation. The Na+ channels begin to close, even in the continued presence of the depolarization.
Inactivation contributes to the repolarization of the action potential. However, inactivation is not enough by itself to account fully for
the repolarization.
2.3 Voltage-Dependent K+ Conductance
Figure 2.5
In addition to voltage-dependent changes in Na+ permeability, there are voltage-dependent changes in K+ permeability. These
changes can be measured with the voltage-clamp technique as well. The figure shown to above indicates the changes in K+
conductance as well as the Na+ conductance. There are two important points.
First, just as there are channels in the membrane that are permeable to Na+ that are normally closed but then open in response to
a voltage, there are also channels in the membrane that are selectively permeable to K+. These K+ channels are normally closed,
but open in response to depolarization.
Second, a major difference between the changes in the K+ channels and the changes in the Na+ channels is that the K+ channels
are slower to activate or open. (Some K+ channels also do not inactivate.) Note that the return of the conductance at the end of
the pulse is not the process of inactivation. With the removal of the pulse, the activated channels are deactivated.
2.4 Sequence of Conductance Changes Underlying the Nerve Action Potential
Some initial depolarization (e.g., a synaptic potential) will begin to open the Na+ channels. The increase in the Na+ influx leads to a
further depolarization.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter02.html 3/7

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Ionic Mechanisms and Action Potentials (Section 1, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
Figure 2.6
A positive feedback cycle rapidly moves the membrane potential toward its peak value, which is close but not equal to the Na+
equilibrium potential. Two processes which contribute to repolarization at the peak of the action potential are then engaged. First,
the Na+ conductance starts to decline due to inactivation. As the Na+ conductance decreases, another feedback cycle is initiated,
but this one is a downward cycle. Sodium conductance decreases, the membrane potential begins to repolarize, and the Na+
channels that are open and not yet inactivated are deactivated and close. Second, the K+ conductance increases. Initially, there is
very little change in the K+ conductance because these channels are slow to open, but by the peak of the action potential, the K+
conductance begins to increase significantly and a second force contributes to repolarization. As the result of these two forces, the
membrane potential rapidly returns to the resting potential. At the time it reaches -60 mV, the Na+ conductance has returned to its
initial value. Nevertheless, the membrane potential becomes more negative (the undershoot or the hyperpolarizing afterpotential).
The key to understanding the hyperpolarizing afterpotential is in the slowness of the K+ channels. Just as the K+ channels are slow
to open (activate), they are also slow to close (deactivate). Once the membrane potential starts to repolarize, the K+ channels
begin to close because they sense the voltage. However, even though the membrane potential has returned to -60 mV, some of the
voltage-dependent K+ channels remain open. Thus, the membrane potential will be more negative than it was initially. Eventually,
these K+ channels close, and the membrane potential returns to -60 mV.
Why does the cell go through these elaborate mechanisms to generate an action potential with a short duration? Recall how
information is coded in the nervous system. If the action potential was about one msec in duration, the frequency of action
potentials could change from once a second to a thousand a second. Therefore, short action potentials provide the nerve cell with
the potential for a large dynamic range of signaling.
2.5 Pharmacology of the Voltage-Dependent Membrane Channels
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter02.html 4/7

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Ionic Mechanisms and Action Potentials (Section 1, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
Figure 2.7 Figure 2.8
Some chemical agents can selectively block voltage-dependent membrane channels. Tetrodotoxin (TTX), which comes from the
Japanese puffer fish, blocks the voltage-dependent changes in Na+ permeability, but has no effect on the voltage-dependent
changes in K+ permeability. This observation indicates that the Na+ and K+ channels are unique; one of these can be selectively
blocked and not affect the other. Another agent, tetraethylammonium (TEA), has no effect on the voltage-dependent changes in
Na+ permeability, but it completely abolishes the voltage-dependent changes in K+ permeability.
Figure 2.9
Use these two agents (TTX and TEA) to test your understanding of the ionic mechanisms of the action potential. What effect would
treating an axon with TTX have on an action potential? An action potential would not occur because an action potential in an axon
cannot be initiated without voltage-dependent Na+ channels. How would TEA affect the action potential? It would be longer and
would not have an undershoot.
In the presence of TEA the initial phase of the action potential is identical, but note that it is much longer and does not have an
after-hyperpolarization. There is a repolarization phase, but now the repolarization is due to the process of Na+ inactivation alone.
Note that in the presence of TEA, there is no change in the resting potential. The channels in the membrane that endow the cell
with the resting potential are different from the ones that are opened by voltage. They are not blocked by TEA. TEA only affects the
voltage-dependent changes in K+ permeability.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter02.html 5/7

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Ionic Mechanisms and Action Potentials (Section 1, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
2.6 Pumps and Leaks
It is easy to receive the impression that there is a "gush" of Na+ that comes into the cell with each action potential. Although, there
is some influx of Na+, it is minute compared to the intracellular concentration of Na+. The influx is insufficient to make any
noticeable change in the intracellular concentration of Na+. Therefore, the Na+ equilibrium potential does not change during or after
an action potential. For any individual action potential, the amount of Na+ that comes into the cell and the amount of K+ that
leaves are insignificant and have no effect on the bulk concentrations. However, without some compensatory mechanism, over the
long-term (many spikes), Na+ influx and K+ efflux would begin to alter the concentrations and the resultant Na+ and K+
equilibrium potentials. The Na+-K+ pumps in nerve cells provide for the long-term maintenance of these concentration gradients.
They keep the intracellular concentrations of K+ high and the Na+ low, and thereby maintain the Na+ equilibrium potential and the
K+ equilibrium potential. The pumps are necessary for the long-term maintenance of the "batteries" so that resting potentials and
action potentials can be supported.
2.7 Types of Membrane Channels
So far, two basic classes of channels, voltage-dependent or voltage-gated channels and voltage-independent channels, have been
considered. Voltage-dependent channels can be further divided based on their permeation properties into voltage-dependent Na+
channels and voltage-dependent K+ channels. There are also voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels (see chapter on Synaptic
Transmission). Indeed, there are multiple types of Ca2+ channels and voltage-dependent K+ channels. Nevertheless, all these
channels are conceptually similar. They are membrane channels that are normally closed and as a result of changes in potential, the
channel (pore) is opened. The amino acid sequence of these channels is known in considerable detail and specific amino acid
sequences have been related to specific aspects of channel function (e.g., ion selectivity, voltage gating, inactivation). A third major
channel class, the transmitter-gated or ligand-gated channels, will be described later.
2.8 Channelopathies
Ion channel mutations have been identified as a possible cause of a wide variety of inherited disorders. Several disorders involving
muscle membrane excitability have been associated with mutations in calcium, sodium and chloride channels as well as
acetylcholine receptors and have been labeled ‘channelopathies’. It is possible that movement disorders, epilepsy and headache, as
well as other rare inherited diseases, might be linked to ion channels. The manifestations and mechanisms of channelopathies
affecting neurons are reviewed in Kullman, 2002. The existence of channelopathies may provide insights into the variety of cellular
mechanisms associated with the misfunctioning of neuronal circuits.
2.9 Absolute and Relative Refractory Periods
The absolute refractory period is a period of time after the initiation of one action potential when it is impossible to initiate a
second action potential no matter how much the cell is depolarized. The relative refractory period is a period after one action
potential is initiated when it is possible to initiate a second action potential, but only with a greater depolarization than was
necessary to initiate the first. The relative refractory period can be understood at least in part by the hyperpolarizing afterpotential.
Assume that an initial stimulus depolarized a cell from -60 mV to -45 mV in order to reach threshold and then consider delivering
the same 15-mV stimulus sometime during the after-hyperpolarization. The stimulus would again depolarize the cell but the
depolarization would be below threshold and insufficient to trigger an action potential. If the stimulus was made larger, however,
such that it again was capable of depolarizing the cell to threshold (-45 mV), an action potential could be initiated.
The absolute refractory period can be explained by the dynamics of the process of Na+-inactivation, the features of which are
illustrated in Figure 2.10. Here, two voltage clamp pulses are delivered. The first pulse produces a voltage-dependent increase in
the Na+ permeability which then undergoes the process of inactivation. If the two pulses are separated sufficiently in time, the
second pulse produces a change in the Na+ conductance, which is identical to the first pulse. However, if the second pulse comes
soon after the first pulse, then the change in Na+ conductance produced by the second pulse is less than that produced by the first.
Indeed, if the second pulse occurs immediately after the first pulse, the second pulse produces no change in the Na+ conductance.
Therefore, when the Na+ channels open and spontaneously inactivate, it takes time (several msec) for them to recover from that
inactivation. This process of recovery from inactivation underlies the absolute refractory period. During an action potential the Na+
channels open and then they become inactivated. Therefore, if a second stimulus is delivered soon after the one that initiated the
first spike, there will be few Na+ channels available to be opened by the second stimulus because they have been inactivated by the
first action potential. The absolute refractory period seems like a relatively unimportant phenomenon, but actually it is essential to
ensure unidirectional propagation of action potentials along axons.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter02.html 6/7

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Ionic Mechanisms and Action Potentials (Section 1, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
Figure 2.10
2.10 Action Potential Laboratory
Click here to go to the interactive Action Potential Laboratory to examine the ways in which the action potential is effected by
changes in the Na+ conductance, K+ conductance and equilibrium potentials for Na+ and K+.
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
Drug X, when applied to a nerve axon, results in both a gradual decrease in the amplitude of
individual action potentials and a depolarization of the resting potential, both of which develop over a
period of several hours. The drug is most likely:
A. Blocking the voltage-dependent Na+ permeability
B. Blocking the voltage-dependent K+ permeability
C. Blocking the (Na+ -K+) pump
D. Blocking the process of Na+ inactivation
E. Increasing the rate at which voltage-dependent changes in K+ permeability occur
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter02.html 7/7



1/7/25, 2:28 AM Resting Potentials and Action Potentials (Section 1, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 1: Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology
Search
Chapter 1: Resting Potentials and Action Potentials
John H. Byrne, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
Revised Summer 2023
Despite the enormous complexity of the brain, it is
possible to obtain an understanding of its function
RReessttiinngg PPootteennttiiaall VV66
by paying attention to two major details:
First, the ways in which individual neurons, the
components of the nervous system, are wired
together to generate behavior.
Second, the biophysical, biochemical, and
electrophysiological properties of the individual
neurons.
A good place to begin is with the components of the
nervous system and how the electrical properties of
the neurons endow nerve cells with the ability to
process and transmit information.
Video of lecture
1.1 Introduction to the Action Potential
Figure 1.1
Tap the colored circles (light stimulus) to activate.
Theories of the encoding and transmission of information in the nervous system go back to the Greek physician Galen (129-210
AD), who suggested a hydraulic mechanism by which muscles contract because fluid flowing into them from hollow nerves. The
basic theory held for centuries and was further elaborated by René Descartes (1596 – 1650) who suggested that animal spirits
flowed from the brain through nerves and then to muscles to produce movements (See this animation for modern interpretation of
such a hydraulic theory for nerve function). A major paradigm shift occurred with the pioneering work of Luigi Galvani who found in
1794 that nerve and muscle could be activated by charged electrodes and suggested that the nervous system functions via
electrical signaling (see this animation of Galvani's experiment). However, there was debate among scholars whether the electricity
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter01.html 1/7

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Resting Potentials and Action Potentials (Section 1, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
was within nerves and muscle or whether the nerves and muscles were simply responding to the harmful electric shock via some
intrinsic nonelectric mechanism. The issue was not resolved until the 1930s with the development of modern electronic amplifiers
and recording devices that allowed the electrical signals to be recorded. One example is the pioneering work of H.K. Hartline 80
years ago on electrical signaling in the horseshoe crab Limulus . Electrodes were placed on the surface of an optic nerve. (By
placing electrodes on the surface of a nerve, it is possible to obtain an indication of the changes in membrane potential that are
occurring between the outside and inside of the nerve cell.) Then 1-s duration flashes of light of varied intensities were presented to
the eye; first dim light, then brighter lights. Very dim lights produced no changes in the activity, but brighter lights produced small
repetitive spike-like events. These spike-like events are called action potentials, nerve impulses, or sometimes simply spikes. Action
potentials are the basic events the nerve cells use to transmit information from one place to another.
1.2 Features of Action Potentials
The recordings in the figure above illustrate three very important features of nerve action potentials. First, the nerve action
potential has a short duration (about 1 msec). Second, nerve action potentials are elicited in an all-or-nothing fashion. Third, nerve
cells code the intensity of information by the frequency of action potentials. When the intensity of the stimulus is increased, the size
of the action potential does not become larger. Rather, the frequency or the number of action potentials increases. In general, the
greater the intensity of a stimulus, (whether it be a light stimulus to a photoreceptor, a mechanical stimulus to the skin, or a stretch
to a muscle receptor) the greater the number of action potentials elicited. Similarly, for the motor system, the greater the number
of action potentials in a motor neuron, the greater the intensity of the contraction of a muscle that is innervated by that motor
neuron.
Action potentials are of great importance to the functioning of the brain since they propagate information in the nervous system to
the central nervous system and propagate commands initiated in the central nervous system to the periphery. Consequently, it is
necessary to understand thoroughly their properties. To answer the questions of how action potentials are initiated and propagated,
we need to record the potential between the inside and outside of nerve cells using intracellular recording techniques.
1.3 Intracellular Recordings from Neurons
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 1.2
The potential difference across a nerve cell membrane can be measured with a microelectrode whose tip is so small (about a
micron) that it can penetrate the cell without producing any damage. When the electrode is in the bath (the extracellular medium)
there is no potential recorded because the bath is isopotential. If the microelectrode is carefully inserted into the cell, there is a
sharp change in potential. The reading of the voltmeter instantaneously changes from 0 mV, to reading a potential difference of -60
mV inside the cell with respect to the outside. The potential that is recorded when a living cell is impaled with a microelectrode is
called the resting potential, and varies from cell to cell. Here it is shown to be -60 mV, but can range between -80 mV and -40 mV,
depending on the particular type of nerve cell. In the absence of any stimulation, the resting potential is generally constant.
It is also possible to record and study the action potential. Figure 1.3 illustrates an example in which a neuron has already been
impaled with one microelectrode (the recording electrode), which is connected to a voltmeter. The electrode records a resting
potential of -60 mV. The cell has also been impaled with a second electrode called the stimulating electrode. This electrode is
connected to a battery and a device that can monitor the amount of current (I) that flows through the electrode. Changes in
membrane potential are produced by closing the switch and by systematically changing both the size and polarity of the battery. If
the negative pole of the battery is connected to the inside of the cell as in Figure 1.3A, an instantaneous change in the amount of
current will flow through the stimulating electrode, and the membrane potential becomes transiently more negative. This result
should not be surprising. The negative pole of the battery makes the inside of the cell more negative than it was before. A change
in potential that increases the polarized state of a membrane is called a hyperpolarization. The cell is more polarized than it was
normally. Use yet a larger battery and the potential becomes even larger. The resultant hyperpolarizations are graded functions of
the magnitude of the stimuli used to produce them.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter01.html 2/7

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Resting Potentials and Action Potentials (Section 1, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
Figure 1.3
Now consider the case in which the positive pole of the battery is connected to the electrode (Figure 1.3B). When the positive pole
of the battery is connected to the electrode, the potential of the cell becomes more positive when the switch is closed (Figure 1.3B).
Such potentials are called depolarizations. The polarized state of the membrane is decreased. Larger batteries produce even
larger depolarizations. Again, the magnitude of the responses are proportional to the magnitude of the stimuli. However, an unusual
event occurs when the magnitude of the depolarization reaches a level of membrane potential called the threshold. A totally new
type of signal is initiated; the action potential. Note that if the size of the battery is increased even more, the amplitude of the
action potential is the same as the previous one (Figure 1.3B). The process of eliciting an action potential in a nerve cell is
analogous to igniting a fuse with a heat source. A certain minimum temperature (threshold) is necessary. Temperatures less than
the threshold fail to ignite the fuse. Temperatures greater than the threshold ignite the fuse just as well as the threshold
temperature and the fuse does not burn any brighter or hotter.
If the suprathreshold current stimulus is long enough, however, a train of action potentials will be elicited. In general, the action
potentials will continue to fire as long as the stimulus continues, with the frequency of firing being proportional to the magnitude of
the stimulus (Figure 1.4).
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter01.html 3/7

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Resting Potentials and Action Potentials (Section 1, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
Figure 1.4
Action potentials are not only initiated in an all-or-nothing fashion, but they are also propagated in an all-or-nothing fashion. An
action potential initiated in the cell body of a motor neuron in the spinal cord will propagate in an undecremented fashion all the
way to the synaptic terminals of that motor neuron. Again, the situation is analogous to a burning fuse. Once the fuse is ignited,
the flame will spread to its end.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter01.html 4/7

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Resting Potentials and Action Potentials (Section 1, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
1.4 Components of the Action Potentials
The action potential consists of several components (Figure 1.3B). The threshold is the value of the membrane potential which, if
reached, leads to the all-or-nothing initiation of an action potential. The initial or rising phase of the action potential is called the
depolarizing phase or the upstroke. The region of the action potential between the 0 mV level and the peak amplitude is the
overshoot. The return of the membrane potential to the resting potential is called the repolarization phase. There is also a
phase of the action potential during which time the membrane potential can be more negative than the resting potential. This phase
of the action potential is called the undershoot or the hyperpolarizing afterpotential. In Figure 1.4, the undershoots of the
action potentials do not become more negative than the resting potential because they are "riding" on the constant depolarizing
stimulus.
1.5 Ionic Mechanisms of Resting Potentials
Before examining the ionic mechanisms of action potentials, it is first necessary to understand the ionic mechanisms of the resting
potential. The two phenomena are intimately related. The story of the resting potential goes back to the early 1900's when Julius
Bernstein suggested that the resting potential (V ) was equal to the potassium equilibrium potential (E ). Where
m K
The key to understanding the resting potential is the fact that ions are distributed unequally on the inside and outside of cells, and
that cell membranes are selectively permeable to different ions. K+ is particularly important for the resting potential. The
membrane is highly permeable to K+. In addition, the inside of the cell has a high concentration of K+ ([K+]) and the outside of the
i
cell has a low concentration of K+ ([K+] ). Thus, K+ will naturally move by diffusion from its region of high concentration to its
o
region of low concentration. Consequently, the positive K+ ions leaving the inner surface of the membrane leave behind some
negatively charged ions. That negative charge attracts the positive charge of the K+ ion that is leaving and tends to "pull it back".
Thus, there will be an electrical force directed inward that will tend to counterbalance the diffusional force directed outward.
Eventually, an equilibrium will be established; the concentration force moving K+ out will balance the electrical force holding it in.
The potential at which that balance is achieved is called the Nernst Equilibrium Potential.
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 1.5
An experiment to test Bernstein's hypothesis that the membrane potential is equal to the Nernst Equilibrium Potential (i.e., V =
m
E ) is illustrated to the left.
K
The K+ concentration outside the cell was systematically varied while the membrane potential was measured. Also shown is the line
that is predicted by the Nernst Equation. The experimentally measured points are very close to this line. Moreover, because of the
logarithmic relationship in the Nernst equation, a change in concentration of K+ by a factor of 10 results in a 60 mV change in
potential.
Note, however, that there are some deviations in the figure at left from what is predicted by the Nernst equation. Thus, one cannot
conclude that V = E . Such deviations indicate that another ion is also involved in generating the resting potential. That ion is
m K
Na+. The high concentration of Na+ outside the cell and relatively low concentration inside the cell results in a chemical (diffusional)
driving force for Na+ influx. There is also an electrical driving force because the inside of the cell is negative and this negativity
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter01.html 5/7

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Resting Potentials and Action Potentials (Section 1, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
attracts the positive sodium ions. Consequently, if the cell has a small permeability to sodium, Na+ will move across the membrane
and the membrane potential would be more depolarized than would be expected from the K+ equilibrium potential.
1.6 Goldman-Hodgkin and Katz (GHK) Equation
When a membrane is permeable to two different ions, the Nernst equation can no longer be used to precisely determine the
membrane potential. It is possible, however, to apply the GHK equation. This equation describes the potential across a membrane
that is permeable to both Na+ and K+.
Note that α is the ratio of Na+ permeability (P ) to K+ permeability (P ). Note also that if the permeability of the membrane to
Na K
Na+ is 0, then alpha in the GHK is 0, and the Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz equation reduces to the Nernst equilibrium potential for K+. If
the permeability of the membrane to Na+ is very high and the potassium permeability is very low, the [Na+] terms become very
large, dominating the equation compared to the [K+] terms, and the GHK equation reduces to the Nernst equilibrium potential for
Na+.
If the GHK equation is applied to the same data in Figure 1.5, there is a much better fit. The value of alpha needed to obtain this
good fit was 0.01. This means that the potassium K+ permeability is 100 times the Na+ permeability. In summary, the resting
potential is due not only to the fact that there is a high permeability to K+. There is also a slight permeability to Na+, which tends
to make the membrane potential slightly more positive than it would have been if the membrane were permeable to K+ alone.
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 1.6
1.7 Membrane Potential Laboratory
Click here to go to the interactive Membrane Potential Laboratory to experiment with the effects of altering external or internal
potassium ion concentration and membrane permeability to sodium and potassium ions. Predictions are made using the Nernst and
the Goldman, Hodgkin, Katz equations.
Membrane Potential Laboratory
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter01.html 6/7

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Resting Potentials and Action Potentials (Section 1, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
If a nerve membrane suddenly became equally permeable to both Na+ and K+, the membrane
potential would:
A. Not change
B. Approach the new K+ equilibrium potential
C. Approach the new Na+ equilibrium potential
D. Approach a value of about 0 mV
E. Approach a constant value of about +55 mV
Question 2 A B C D E
If the concentration of K+ in the cytoplasm of an invertebrate axon is changed to a new value of 200
mM (Note: for this axon normal [K]o = 20 mM and normal [K]i = 400 mM):
A. The membrane potential would become more negative
B. The K+ equilibrium potential would change by 60 mV
C. The K+ equilibrium potential would be about -60 mV
D. The K+ equilibrium potential would be about -18 mV
E. An action potential would be initiated
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter01.html 7/7



1/7/25, 2:28 AM Introduction to Neurons and Neuronal Networks | Section 1, Intro Chapter | Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neu…
-->
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 1: Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology
Search
Introduction to Neurons and Neuronal Networks
John H. Byrne, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
Revised 10 September 2024
IInnttrroo ttoo NNeeuurroosscciieennccee
The three pounds of jelly-like material found within
our skulls is the most complex machine on Earth and
perhaps the universe. Its phenomenal features would
not be possible without the hundreds of billions of
neurons that make it up, and, importantly, the
connections between those neurons. Fortunately,
much is known about the properties of individual
neurons and simple neuronal networks, and aspects
of complex neuronal networks are beginning to be
unraveled. This chapter will begin with a discussion
of the neuron, the elementary node or element of the
brain, and then move to a discussion of the ways in
which individual neurons communicate with each
other. What makes the nervous system such a
fantastic device and distinguishes the brain from
other organs of the body is not that it has 100 billion
neurons, but that nerve cells are capable of
Video of lecture
communicating with each other in such a highly
structured manner as to form neuronal networks. To understand neural networks, it is necessary to understand the ways in which
one neuron communicates with another through synaptic connections and the process called synaptic transmission. Synaptic
transmission comes in two basic flavors: excitation and inhibition. Just a few interconnected neurons (a microcircuit) can perform
sophisticated tasks such as mediate reflexes, process sensory information, generate locomotion and mediate learning and memory.
More complex networks (macrocircuits) consist of multiple imbedded microcircuits. Macrocircuits mediate higher brain functions
such as object recognition and cognition. So, multiple levels of networks are ubiquitous in the nervous system. Networks are also
prevalent within neurons. These nanocircuits constitute the underlying biochemical machinery for mediating key neuronal
properties such as learning and memory and the genesis of neuronal rhythmicity.
The Neuron
Basic morphological features of neurons
The 100 billion neurons in the brain share a number of common features (Figure 1). Neurons are different from most other cells in
the body in that they are polarized and have distinct morphological regions, each with specific functions. Dendrites are the region
where one neuron receives connections from other neurons. The cell body or soma contains the nucleus and the other organelles
necessary for cellular function. The axon is a key component of nerve cells over which information is transmitted from one part of
the neuron (e.g., the cell body) to the terminal regions of the neuron. Axons can be rather long extending up to a meter or so in
some human sensory and motor nerve cells. The synapse is the terminal region of the axon and it is here where one neuron forms
a connection with another and conveys information through the process of synaptic transmission. The aqua-colored neuron in
Figure 1 (click on "Neuron Connected to a Postsynaptic Neuron") is referred to as the postsynaptic neuron. The tan-colored
terminal to the left is consequently referred to as the presynaptic neuron. One neuron can receive contacts from many different
neurons. Figure 1 (click on "Neuron Receiving Synaptic Input") shows an example of three presynaptic neurons contacting the one
tan-colored postsynaptic neuron, but it has been estimated that one neuron can receive contacts from up to 10,000 other cells.
Consequently, the potential complexity of the networks is vast. Similarly, any one neuron can contact up to 10,000 postsynaptic
cells. (Note that the tan-colored neuron that was presynaptic to the aqua-colored neuron is postsynaptic to the pink, green, and
blue neurons. So most “presynaptic” neurons are “postsynaptic” to some other neuron(s).
Figure 1 (click on "The Synapse") also shows an expanded view of the synapse. Note that the presynaptic cell is not directly
connected to the postsynaptic cell. The two are separated by a gap known as the synaptic cleft. Therefore, to communicate with
the postsynaptic cell, the presynaptic neuron needs to release a chemical messenger. That messenger is found within the
neurotransmitter-containing vesicles (the blue dots represent the neurotransmitter). An action potential that invades the
presynaptic terminal causes these vesicles to fuse with the inner surface of the presynaptic membrane and release their contents
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/introduction.html 1/17

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Introduction to Neurons and Neuronal Networks | Section 1, Intro Chapter | Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neu…
through a process called exocytosis. The released transmitter diffuses across the gap between the pre- and the postsynaptic cell
and very rapidly reaches the postsynaptic side of the synapse where it binds to specialized receptors that “recognize” the
transmitter. The binding to the receptors leads to a change in the permeability of ion channels in the membrane and in turn a
change in the membrane potential of the postsynaptic neuron known as a postsynaptic synaptic potential (PSP). So signaling
among neurons is associated with changes in the electrical properties of neurons. To understand neurons and neuronal circuits, it is
necessary to understand the electrical properties of nerve cells.
Figure 1
Resting Potentials and Action Potentials
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 2
Resting potentials. Figure 2 shows an example of an idealized nerve cell. Placed in the extracellular medium is a microelectrode.
A microelectrode is nothing more than a small piece of glass capillary tubing that is stretched under heat to produce a very fine tip,
on the order of 1 micron in diameter. The microelectrode is filled with a conducting solution and then connected to a suitable
recording device such as an oscilloscope or chart recorder. With the electrode outside the cell in the extracellular medium, zero
potential is recorded because the extracellular medium is isopotential. If, however, the electrode penetrates the cell such that the
tip of the electrode is now inside the cell, a sharp deflection is seen on the recording device. A potential of about -60 millivolts
inside negative with respect to the outside is recorded. This potential is called the resting potential and is constant for indefinite
periods of time in the absence of any stimulation. If the electrode is removed, a potential of zero is recorded again. Resting
potentials are not just characteristics of nerve cells; all cells in the body have resting potentials. What distinguishes nerve cells and
other excitable membranes (e.g., muscle cells) is that they are capable of changing their resting potential. In the case of nerve
cells, for integrating information and transmitting information, whereas, in the case of muscle cells, for producing muscle
contractions.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/introduction.html 2/17

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Introduction to Neurons and Neuronal Networks | Section 1, Intro Chapter | Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neu…
Action potentials. Figure 3 shows another sketch of an idealized neuron. This neuron has been impaled with one electrode to
measure the resting potential and a second electrode called the stimulating electrode. The stimulating electrode is connected
through a switch to a battery. If the battery is oriented such that the positive pole is connected to the switch, closing the switch
will make the inside of the cell somewhat more positive depending upon the size of the battery. (Such a decrease in the polarized
state of a membrane is called a depolarization.) Figure 3 is an animation in which the switch is repeatedly opened and closed and
each time it is closed a larger battery is applied to the circuit. Initially, the switch closure produces only small depolarizations.
However, the potentials become larger and eventually the depolarization is sufficiently large to trigger an action potential, also
known as a spike or an impulse. The action potential is associated with a very rapid depolarization to achieve a peak value of about
+40 mV in just 0.5 milliseconds (msec). The peak is followed by an equally rapid repolarization phase.
Figure 3
The voltage at which the depolarization becomes sufficient to trigger an action potential is called the threshold. If a larger battery
is used to generate a suprathreshold depolarization, a single action potential is still generated and the amplitude of that action
potential is the same as the action potential trigged by a just-threshold stimulus. The simple recording in Figure 3 illustrates two
very important features of action potentials. First, they are elicited in an all-or-nothing fashion. Either an action potential is
elicited with stimuli at or above threshold, or an action potential is not elicited. Second, action potentials are very brief events of
only about several milliseconds in duration. Initiating an action potential is somewhat analogous to applying match to a fuse. A
certain temperature is needed to ignite the fuse (i.e., the fuse has a threshold). A match that generates a greater amount of heat
than the threshold temperature will not cause the fuse to burn any brighter or faster. Just as action potentials are elicited in an all-
or-nothing fashion, they are also propagated in an all-or-nothing fashion. Once an action potential is initiated in one region of a
neuron such as the cell body, that action potential will propagate along the axon (like a burning fuse) and ultimately invade the
synapse where it can initiate the process of synaptic transmission.
In the example in Figure 3, only a single action potential was generated because the duration of each of the two suprathreshold
stimuli was so brief that sufficient time was only available to initiate a single action potential (i.e., the stimulus ended before the
action potential completed its depolarization-repolarization cycle). But, as shown in the animations of Figure 4, longer-duration
stimuli can lead to the initiation of multiple action potentials, the frequency of which is dependent on the intensity of the stimulus.
Therefore, it is evident that the nervous system encodes information not in terms of the changes in the amplitude of action
potentials, but rather in their frequency. This is a very universal property. The greater the intensity of a mechanical stimulus to a
touch receptor, the greater the number of action potentials; the greater the amount of stretch to a muscle stretch receptor, the
greater the number of action potentials; the greater the intensity of a light, the greater the number of action potentials that is
transmitted to the central nervous system. Similarly, in the motor system, the greater the number of action potentials in a motor
neuron, the greater will be the contraction of the muscle that receives a synaptic connection from that motor neuron. Engineers
call this type of information coding pulse frequency modulation.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/introduction.html 3/17

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Introduction to Neurons and Neuronal Networks | Section 1, Intro Chapter | Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neu…
Figure 4
Synaptic potentials and synaptic integration
Figure 5 illustrates three neurons. The one colored green will be referred to as an excitatory neuron for reasons that will become
clear shortly. It makes a connection to the postsynaptic neuron colored blue. The traces below (press "Play") illustrate the
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/introduction.html 4/17

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Introduction to Neurons and Neuronal Networks | Section 1, Intro Chapter | Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neu…
consequences of initiating an action potential in the green neuron. That action potential in the presynaptic neuron leads to a
decrease in the membrane potential of the postsynaptic cell. The membrane potential changes from its resting value of about -60
millivolts to a more depolarized state. This potential is called an excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP). It is “excitatory” because
it moves the membrane potential toward the threshold and it is “postsynaptic” because it is a potential recorded on the
postsynaptic side of the synapse. Generally (and this is an important point), a single action potential in a presynaptic cell does not
produce an EPSP large enough to reach threshold and trigger an action potential. But, if multiple action potentials are fired in the
presynaptic cell, the corresponding multiple excitatory potentials can summate through a process called temporal summation to
reach threshold and triggering an action potential. EPSPs can be viewed as a “go signal” to the postsynaptic neuron to transmit
information through a network pathway.
PLAY
Excitatory neuron
EXCITATION
INHIBITION
Inhibitory neuron
Postsynaptic neuron
INTEGRATION
Threshold Excitation
Postsynaptic neuron
Inhibition
Excitatory neuron
Inhibitory neuron
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 5
The red-colored neuron in Figure 5 is referred to as an inhibitory neuron. Like the green neuron, it also makes a synaptic contact
with the blue postsynaptic neuron. It also releases a chemical transmitter messenger, but the consequences of the transmitter
from the blue cell binding to receptors on the postsynaptic cell is opposite to the consequences of the transmitter released by the
green neuron. The consequence of action potential in the red presynaptic neuron is to produce an increase in the membrane
potential, i.e. a hyperpolarization of the blue postsynaptic neuron. Therefore the membrane potential is farther away from
threshold. This type of potential is called an inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP) because it tends to prevent the postsynaptic
neuron from firing an action potential. This is a “stop signal” for the postsynaptic cell. So the green neuron says “go” and the red
neuron says “stop”. Now what is the postsynaptic neuron to do?
Neurons are like adding machines. They are constantly adding up the excitatory and the inhibitory synaptic input in time (temporal
summation) and over the area of the dendrites receiving synaptic contacts (spatial summation), and if that summation is at or
above threshold they fire an action potential. If the sum is below threshold, no action potential is initiated. This is a process called
synaptic integration and is illustrated in Figure 5. Initially, two action potentials in the green neuron produced summating EPSPs
that fired an action potential in the blue neuron. But, if an IPSP from the inhibitory neuron occurs just before two action potentials
in the excitatory neuron, the summation of the one IPSP and the two EPSPs is below threshold and no action potential is elicited in
the postsynaptic cell. The inhibitory neuron (and inhibition in general) is a way of gating or regulating the ability of an excitatory
signal to fire a postsynaptic cell.
Neuronal Networks
Micronetwork motifs
As indicated earlier in the chapter, a neuron can receive contacts from up to 10,000 presynaptic neurons, and, in turn, any one
neuron can contact up to 10,000 postsynaptic neurons. The combinatorial possibility could give rise to enormously complex
neuronal circuits or network topologies, which might be very difficult to understand. But despite the potential vast complexity,
much can be learned about the functioning of neuronal circuits by examining the properties of a subset of simple circuit
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/introduction.html 5/17

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Introduction to Neurons and Neuronal Networks | Section 1, Intro Chapter | Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neu…
configurations. Figure 6 illustrates some of those microcircuit or micronetwork motifs. Although simple, they can do much of what
needs to be done by a nervous system.
Feedforward excitation. Allows one neuron to relay information to its neighbor. Long chains of these can be used to propagate
information through the nervous system.
Feedforward inhibition. A presynaptic cell excites an inhibitory interneuron (an interneuron is a neuron interposed between two
neurons) and that inhibitory interneuron then inhibits the next follower cell. This is a way of shutting down or limiting excitation in
a downstream neuron in a neural circuit.
Convergence/Divergence. One postsynaptic cell receives convergent input from a number of different presynaptic cells and any
individual neuron can make divergent connections to many different postsynaptic cells. Divergence allows one neuron to
communicate with many other neurons in a network. Convergence allows a neuron to receive input from many neurons in a
network.
Lateral inhibition. A presynaptic cell excites inhibitory interneurons and they inhibit neighboring cells in the network. As described
in detail later in the Chapter, this type of circuit can be used in sensory systems to provide edge enhancement.
Feedback/recurrent inhibition. In Panel E1, a presynaptic cell connects to a postsynaptic cell, and the postsynaptic cell in turn
connects to an interneuron, which then inhibits the presynaptic cell. This circuit can limit excitation in a pathway. Some initial
excitation would be shut off after the red interneuron becomes active. In Panel E2, each neuron in the closed chain inhibits the
neuron to which it is connected. This circuit would appear to do nothing, but, as will be seen later in the Chapter, it can lead to the
generation of complex patterns of spike activity.
Feedback/recurrent excitation. In Panel F1, a presynaptic neuron excites a postsynaptic neuron and that postsynaptic neuron
excites the presynaptic neuron. This type of circuit can serve a switch-like function because once the presynaptic cell is activated
that activation could be perpetuated. Activation of the presynaptic neuron could switch this network on and it could stay on. Panel
F2 shows variants of feedback excitation in which a presynaptic neuron excites a postsynaptic neuron that can feedback to excite
itself (a, an autapse) or other neurons which ultimately feedback (b) to itself.
These simple motifs are ubiquitous components of many neural circuits. Let’s examine some examples of what these networks can
do.
Feedforward excitation and feedforward inhibition
One of the best understood microcircuits is the circuit that mediates simple reflex behaviors. Figure 7 illustrates the circuit for the
so-called knee jerk or stretch reflex. A neurologist strikes the knee with a rubber tapper, which elicits an extension of the leg. This
test is used as a simple way to examine the integrity of some of the sensory and motor pathways in the spinal cord. The tap of
hammer stretches the muscle and leads to the initiation of action potentials in sensory neurons within the muscle that are sensitive
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/introduction.html 6/17

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Introduction to Neurons and Neuronal Networks | Section 1, Intro Chapter | Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neu…
to stretch. (The action potentials are represented by the small bright “lights” in the animation.) The action potentials are initiated
in an all-or-nothing fashion and propagate into the spinal cord where the axon splits (bifurcates) into two branches.
SN
Afferent Fiber
Interneuron
Extensor E Neuron
Muscle
F Neuron
Flexor
Muscle
c 2000 UTHSCH
S.Littlejohn
Figure 7
Let’s first discuss the branch to the left that forms a synaptic connection (green triangle) with an Extensor (E) motor neuron
(colored blue). The action potential in the sensory neuron invades the synaptic terminal of the sensory neuron causing the release
of transmitter and subsequent excitation of the motor neuron. The stretch to the muscle leads to an action potential in the motor
neuron (MN), which then propagates out the peripheral nerve to invade the synapse at the muscle, causing the release of
transmitter and an action potential in the muscle. The action potential in the muscle cell leads to a contraction of the muscle and
an extension of the limb. So, here we have a simple feedforward excitation circuit that mediates a behavior.
Now let’s examine the right branch of the axon of the sensory neuron of Figure 7. The action potential in the sensory neuron
invades the synaptic terminal of the sensory neuron causing the release of transmitter, and subsequent excitation of the
postsynaptic interneuron colored black. This neuron is called an interneuron because it is interposed between one neuron (here the
SN) and another neuron (here the MN). The excitation of the interneuron leads to the initiation of an action and the subsequent
release of transmitter from the presynaptic terminal of the interneuron (black triangle), but for this branch of the circuit, the
transmitter leads to an IPSP in the postsynaptic flexor (F) motor neuron (colored red). The functional consequences of this
feedforward inhibition it is to decrease the probability of the flexor motor neuron becoming active and producing an inappropriate
flexion of the leg.
Convergence and divergence
The simplified circuit mediating the stretch reflex is summarized in Figure 8. However, the proper function of the circuit of the
stretch reflex also relies on convergence and divergence. A single sensory has multiple branches that diverge and make synaptic
connections with many individual motor neurons (click on "Divergence"). Therefore, when the muscle contracts as a result of the
neurologist’s tapper, it does so because multiple muscle fibers are activated simultaneously by multiple motor neurons. Also, when
the muscle is stretched, not one, but multiple sensory neuron are activated and these sensory neurons all project into the spinal
cord where they converge on to individual extensor motor neurons (click on "Convergence"). So, the stretch reflex is due to the
combined effects of the activation of multiple sensory neurons and extensor motor neurons.
Figure 8
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/introduction.html 7/17

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Introduction to Neurons and Neuronal Networks | Section 1, Intro Chapter | Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neu…
Lateral inhibition
Figure 9
Edge enhancement. Lateral inhibition is very important for processing sensory information. One example is a phenomenon in the
visual system called edge enhancement. Figure 9 illustrates two bands, a dark gray band on the left, and a light gray band on the
right. Although the dark band and the light band are of uniform luminance throughout each field, a close examination reveals that
the light gray band appears somewhat lighter at the border of the dark gray band than it is in the other regions of the field. In
contrast, the dark gray band appears somewhat darker at the border than at other regions of the dark field. This is a phenomenon
of edge enhancement, which helps the visual system to extract important information from visual scenes. Edge enhancement is
mediated, at least in part by lateral inhibition in the retina.
Let’s first consider a circuit without lateral inhibition (Figure 10, click on "Without Lateral Inhibition"). Light falls on the retina (Part
A) and the intensity can be described by the step-like gradient (Part B). As a simplification, assume that the dark gray region has
an intensity of five units and the light gray region has an intensity of ten units. The gradient of light activates the photoreceptors
and the photoreceptors make synaptic connections to second-order neurons. Assume that the light intensity of 5 units leads to 5
spikes/s and the light intensity of 10 units leads to 10 spikes/s (Part C) in the photo receptors, and that the synaptic strength is
sufficient (here indicated as +1) so that the light intensity of 5 units leads to 5 spikes/s and the light intensity of 10 units leads to
10 spikes/s (Part C) respectively in the second-order neurons. If no further processing of the information occurred, the gradient
that is perceived would be exactly the same as the gradient of the light intensity (Part B, red trace). But that is not what is
perceived and lateral inhibition explains the difference.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/introduction.html 8/17

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Introduction to Neurons and Neuronal Networks | Section 1, Intro Chapter | Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neu…
Figure 10
Now consider the expanded circuit with lateral inhibition (click on "With Lateral Inhibition"). Each one of the photoreceptors makes
inhibitory synaptic connections with its neighboring second-order neuron. The strength of the inhibition (denoted by the -0.2) is
less than the strength of the excitation (donated by the +1). Before looking at the border, consider the output of the circuit at the
uniform areas of the each field. Far to the right side of the border all of the cells are receiving the same excitation and the same
inhibition. Without lateral inhibition, the light intensity of 10 units would produce 10 spikes/s in the second-order-neuron. But
because of the inhibitory connection from neighbor neurons to the right and left, the output is reduced to 6 spikes/s. The same is
true for cells far to the left of the border but the magnitude of the excitation is less and correspondingly the magnitude of the
inhibition is less. The key processing occurs at the border or edge. Note that the neuron just to the right of the border receives the
same inhibition from the neuron to its right but receives less inhibition from the neuron to its left on the other side of the border.
Therefore, it receives more net excitation and it has an output of 7 spikes/s rather than the 6 spikes/s of its neighbor to the right.
Now look at the neuron to the left of the border. It receives weak inhibition from its neighbor to the left, but stronger inhibition from
its neighbor to the right on the other side of the border. Therefore, it receives less net excitation and it has an output of 2 spikes/s
rather than the 3 spikes/s of its neighbor to the left. So as a result of lateral inhibition the information transmitted to the nervous
system and the gradient that is perceived would be a version of the original one with an enhanced border or edge (Figure 10B)!
Mach bands. The simple retinal circuit with lateral inhibition can account the phenomenon of edge enhancement. It can also
account for a visual illusion known as Mach bands. Figure 11 illustrates a gradient of light and dark vertical bands and across these
bands is a thin horizontal line. It appears as though the horizontal line has an uneven distribution of intensities with it being darker
in the region of the light vertical gradients and lighter in the region of the dark vertical gradients. This is a visual illusion. The
illusion can be revealed by placing a mask over the vertical gradient. (Press "Play" to add the mask.) Now you can see that the
horizontal bar has uniform intensity. It is perceived darker in some regions because the cells in the retina that respond to the
darker region of the horizontal bar are strongly inhibited by the cells responding to the bright region of the vertical band. In
contrast, the bar is perceived brighter in some regions because the cells in the retina that respond to the lighter region of the
horizontal bar are only weakly inhibited by the cells responding to the dark region of the vertical band.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/introduction.html 9/17

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Introduction to Neurons and Neuronal Networks | Section 1, Intro Chapter | Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neu…
PLAY
Figure 11
Feedback/recurrent inhibition
Feedback inhibition in microcircuits. Feedback inhibition plays a general role in damping excitation through a neural circuit. A
classic example is the Renshaw cell in the spinal cord. The axon of a spinal motor neuron branches. One branch innervates muscle
as described earlier (e.g., Figure 7) and the other branch makes an excitatory synaptic connection with an interneuron called the
Renshaw cell. The interneuron in turn inhibits the motor neuron, thereby closing the loop. Another example of feedback inhibition
is found in the hippocampus. CA3-type pyramidal cells make excitatory connections to basket cells and the basket cells feedback to
inhibit the CA3 cells. The term recurrent inhibition is applied to simple feedback inhibition circuits such as the Renshaw circuit in
the spinal cord and the basket cell circuit in the hippocampus.
Feedback inhibition in nanocircuits. Feedback inhibition is not only prevalent in many neuronal circuits; it is also prevalent in
biochemical circuits. Here it can serve as a substrate for generating oscillations. These can cover multiple time scales from
seconds to days depending on the molecular components of the circuit.
Figure 12. From Byrne, Canavier, Lechner, Clark and Baxter, 1996.
1. Endogenous bursting behavior in neurons. The idealized neuron described earlier in the Chapter was silent in the absence of
stimulation (e.g., Figure 3). However, some neurons fire action potentials in the absence of stimulation, and, in some cases,
the firing patterns can exhibit a bursting pattern in which successive high frequency spike activity is followed by quiescent
periods. Such neuronal properties could be important for generating rhythmic behaviors such as respiration. Figure 12 is an
example of a recording from an invertebrate neuron that has an endogenous bursting rhythm. This particular neuron is called
the parabolic burster because the nature of the inter-spike intervals being long in the beginning and end of the burst cycle,
but very brief in the middle of the cycle. The cell fires a burst of action potentials and then becomes silent, but soon another
burst occurs and this process continues indefinitely about every ten to fifteen seconds. The bursting occurs even if the neuron
is surgically removed from the ganglion and placed in culture so there are no synaptic connections from other neurons. So a
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/introduction.html 10/17

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Introduction to Neurons and Neuronal Networks | Section 1, Intro Chapter | Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neu…
neuronal network is not necessary for this rhythm - it is endogenous. But, it does involve a nanocircuit within the cell. Figure
13A illustrates a very simplified version of that network that emphasizes the key principle of operation. Critical for this
network function is a channel in the membrane (labeled g ), which is permeable to Ca2+. Because the concentration of Ca2+
SI
is relatively high in the extracellular medium and low inside the cell, Ca2+ will move down its concentration gradient and in so
doing will depolarize the cell. Eventually, the depolarization reaches threshold and the cell begins to fire. The firing leads to
additional influx of Ca2+ (green arrow) and accumulation of Ca2+ within the cell. The key step is that the accumulation of
Ca2+ inhibits (red arrow) the further influx of calcium and terminates the burst. The burst remains terminated as long as the
levels of intracellular Ca2+ remain elevated. But the levels of Ca2+ do not remain elevated for long. They are reduced by
intracellular buffers and removed from the cell by pumps (I and I ). As intracellular levels of Ca2+ are reduced, the
NaCa CaP
inhibition of the channel is removed (disinhibition) and the neuron begins to depolarize again and another burst is initiated.
Essentially, what is seen here at the nanonetwork level is a recapitulation of a feedback inhibitory network (Figure 13B, hover
over the area to the right of Fig. 13A). An initial excitatory process leads to activation of an inhibitory process, which feeds
back to shut off the excitatory process. In such a network, oscillations will result if the excitatory drive is continuous, but the
inhibitory process wanes in its effectiveness.
Figure 13
2.
Figure 14. Modified from Hastings et al., Nature Rev. Neurosci.,
2003.
Circadian rhythms. A second example of feedback inhibition is the nanocircuit for the gene regulation that underlies circadian
rhythms. The vertebrate circadian rhythm is due to the operation of a group of neurons in a region of the brain called the
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/introduction.html 11/17

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Introduction to Neurons and Neuronal Networks | Section 1, Intro Chapter | Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neu…
suprachiasmatic nucleus, which is located just above the optic nerve. Those neurons have profound effects on both hormonal
release such as melatonin, cortisol, as well as on autonomic functions such as body temperature (Figure 14). Despite the
profound effects of this oscillator, its operation reduces to a very simple circuit, and indeed not a neural circuit, but rather
another nanocircuit. The basic mechanism seems to be conserved across all animal species including man. Figure 15 is a
simplified schematic diagram of the basic components. Several genes are involved but the core mechanism involves a gene
called per, where per is for period. This gene was first identified from the fruit fly Drosophila but is also present in
vertebrates. The per gene leads to the production of per messenger RNA. The per mRNA leaves the nucleus and enters the
cytoplasm where it leads to the synthesis of PER protein. PER diffuses or is transported back into the nucleus where it
represses the further transcription of the per gene. Conceptually, this system is very similar to that of the mechanism for the
bursting neuron discussed above. The gene is activated, it produces the mRNA and the protein, and the protein feedbacks to
inhibit the gene expression. But how does the cycle repeat itself? The key mechanism is degradation of the PER. PER
protein is degraded and it is degraded over a 24 hour period. So as the PER protein is degraded the inhibition or repression is
removed (disinhibition) allowing this gene to start making messenger RNA and protein all over again. So once this cycle
begins, it is repeated over and over again at a 24 hour period. This is the core mechanism underlying circadian rhythms and
the powerful affects that they have on a number of different physiological systems. Basically, our circadian rhythms all start
with a molecular feedback inhibition network.
Figure 15
Feedback inhibition in ring circuits. Recurrent inhibition can, at least in principle, explain the generation of complex motor patters,
an example of which is quadrupedal locomotion. Quadrupedal location is interesting because quadrupeds are capable of not only
moving their four legs, but generating different types of cycles of activity called gaits. Figure 16 illustrates four gaits. The first
panel is a walk (hover over the panel). The sequence begins with extension of the left front limb. This is followed by extensions of
the right hind limb, the right front limb and the left hind limb. In the trot (second panel of Figure 16) (hover over the panel), the
left front and right hind limbs are in phase with each other and 180 degrees out of phase with the right front and left hind limbs. In
the bound (third panel) (hover over the panel) the left front and right front limbs are in phase, but 180 degrees out of phase with
the left hind and rear hind limbs. The gallop (fourth panel) (hover over the panel) is a variant of the bound in which there is a
slight phase difference between the right and left front limbs and rear limbs.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/introduction.html 12/17

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Introduction to Neurons and Neuronal Networks | Section 1, Intro Chapter | Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neu…
Walk Trot Bound Gallop
Figure 16
How does the nervous system generate these gaits? And, are separate neuronal circuits necessary for each one? Unfortunately,
neuroscientists do not know the answers to these questions, but it is instructive to examine some possibilities. This is an approach
in a field of neuroscience called Computational and Theoretical Neuroscience. One way to generate a gait is illustrated in Figure 17.
Take four individual neurons each with endogenous bursting activity like the one illustrated previously in Figure 12, and assign
activity in each one of these neurons to the control of a specific limb. The neurons could be “started” so that they have the
appropriate phase relationships to generate a gait such as the bound illustrated in Figure 16. The difficulty would be in starting the
neurons at exactly the precise time. Another problem would be slight “drifts” in the oscillatory periods of the four independent
neurons that over time would cause the pattern to become uncoordinated (Figure 18). This dog is not going to win any races and it
is probably not going to be able to walk.
Figure 17 Figure 18
So clearly the neurons need to be coupled. One way of doing this is to use a recurrent inhibition circuit consisting of four coupled
neurons to form a so called “ring” circuit where each neuron in the circuit has endogenous bursting activity and each neuron is
coupled to the next with an inhibitory synaptic connection (Figure 19A).
Figure 19. Modified from Canavier, Butera, Dror, Baxter, Clark and Byrne,
1997.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/introduction.html 13/17

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Introduction to Neurons and Neuronal Networks | Section 1, Intro Chapter | Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neu…
To obtain the correct phase relationships for gaits, rather than assigning Neuron 3 to be the right front, it is assigned to control the
right hind limb, and Neuron 4 is assigned to control the right front limb (a simple twist of the circuit) (Figure 19B). When
implemented with a computer simulation, this single circuit is capable of generating quadrupedal gates. Moreover, the same circuit,
with just small changes in the properties of the individual neurons, can generate each of the four gaits illustrated in Figure 17
(Figure 20).
Walk Trot Bound Gallop
Figure 20
This result indicates an important point about neural networks. In order to understand them it is necessary to understand not just
the topology of the network, but also the nature of the connections between the neurons (whether they are excitatory or
inhibitory), as well as the properties of the individual nodes (i.e., the neurons). Also, this simulation illustrates a phenomenon
called dynamic reconfiguration. It is not necessary to have four different networks to generate these four different gaits - it can all
be done with a single circuit. The actual circuit generating quadrapedal gaits is more complex than that of Fig. 19. The interested
reader is referred to a recent review by Ole Keihn (See Further Reading)
Feedback/recurrent excitation
Recurrent excitation in nanocircuits and microcircuits appears to be critical for learning and memory processes. Learning involves
changes in the biophysical properties of neurons and changes in synaptic strength. Accumulating evidence indicates positive
feedback within biochemical cascades and gene networks is an important component for the induction and maintenance of these
changes. Moreover, recurrent excitation is found in at least some microcircuits involved in memory processes. A prime example is
found within the CA3 region of the hippocampus.
Figure 21. Modified from Byrne and Roberts, 2009.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/introduction.html 14/17

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Introduction to Neurons and Neuronal Networks | Section 1, Intro Chapter | Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neu…
Figure 21 illustrates key features of the CA3 recurrent excitatory circuit. Six different hippocampal pyramidal neurons are labeled
as U, V, W, X, Y, and Z. Each one of these neurons receives a synaptic connection from the presynaptic neurons labeled a, b, c, d,
e, and f. These presynaptic neurons can be either active or inactive with a 0 and black color representing an inactive neuron and a
1 and a green color indicating an active one. An important aspect of this circuitry is that the synaptic connections from the input
pathway are sufficiently strong to activate (fire) the pyramidal neuron to which they are connected. For example, if neuron a is
activated, neuron Z will be activated, which is represented as a 1 on the Output bar. This topology is nothing more than
feedforward excitation. The reciprocal excitation makes this circuit special. For example, neuron Z and the other pyramidal
neurons have axon collaterals that feedback to connect with themselves. But, they not only make a connection with themselves.
Each neuron makes a connection with each of the five other pyramidal neurons in the circuit. So every pyramidal receives
convergent information from all the other cells in the network, and, in turn, the output of each pyramidal neuron diverges to make
synaptic connections with all the other pyramidal neurons in the circuit. (Therefore, this recurrent excitation motif has embedded
within it the convergence and divergence motifs.) The matrix of connectivity consists of 36 elements.
In order for this network to learn anything, a synaptic plasticity learning rule needs to be embedded into the circuit. One that is
widely accepted is known as the Hebb Learning Rule. Essentially, it states that a synapse will change its strength if that synapse is
active (i.e., releases transmitter) and, at the same time, the postsynaptic cell is active. The combination of this learning rule and
the recurrent excitatory circuit leads to some interesting emergent properties. For example, if neuron Z is activated by input a, the
strength of its connection to itself (synapse 1) will change as indicated by the green colored synapse on Figure 21 (hover over the
illustration). However, synapse 1 will not be the only synapse that will be strengthened. For example, synapse 13 will also be
strengthened because neuron Z was active at the same time neuron X was activated by input c. In contrast, synapse 7 is not
strengthened because neuron Y was not active at the same time as neuron Z. The net effect of this convergence and divergence
and the learning rule is that an initial activity input pattern will be stored as changes in the elements of the connectivity matrix.
This circuit has therefore been called an auto-association network. An important concept here is that the ”memory” is not in any
one synapse; it is distributed in the network.
Summary
Considerable progress has been made in understanding how different simple neural networks are involved in information processing
and mediating behavior. Feedforward excitation and feedforward inhibition mediate reflex behaviors. Lateral inhibition is important
for edge enhancement. Recurrent excitation is an important mechanism for memory. Recurrent inhibition can be important for
generating locomotor behavior. Convergence and divergence are embedded in these microcircuits. The same kinds of network
motifs are recapitulated in biochemical and gene networks.
The next level of understanding is at the level of the neuronal networks that mediate more complex, so called higher-order
functions of the brain. Their understanding is becoming possible through the use of electrophysiological and optical recording
techniques, and modern imaging techniques such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and diffusion tensor imaging
(DTI). fMRI allows investigators to identify areas of the brain that are engaged in cognitive tasks, whereas DTI allows visualization
of pathways linking one brain region to another. Figure 22 (courtesy of Tim Ellmore, Ph.D., Dept. of Neurosurgery, The University
of Texas Medical School at Houston) is a side view of the human brain showing the pathways interconnecting cortical areas revealed
using DTI.
0:00/ 0:11
Figure 22. Courtesy of Tim Ellmore, Ph.D.
Object recognition is an example where progress is being made in understanding macrocircuits. As illustrated in Figure 23,
processing of visual information starts in the retina and then engages multiple cortical regions such as the occipital cortex and the
temporal cortex. Within this macrocircuit are modules that extract higher-order information. Each module presumably involves
hundreds, if not thousands of individual microcircuits. The challenge for the future is to determine how these modules work and
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/introduction.html 15/17

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Introduction to Neurons and Neuronal Networks | Section 1, Intro Chapter | Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neu…
how they interact with other modules. Although feedforward connections are present, feedback connections and lateral connections
are widespread. The challenge is enormous but perhaps achievement of the goal will be facilitated by taking advantage of what has
been learned about the principles of nanocircuits and microcircuits. To understand the macrocircuits it will be necessary to know
more than the topology of the network interconnections. It will be necessary to know how each module functions and about the
dynamics of the inter module connections.
Figure 23. From Felleman and Van Essen, 1991.
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
Common circuit motifs that mediate the spinal stretch reflex include all of the following EXCEPT:
A. Feedforward excitation
B. Feedforward inhibition
C. Feedback inhibition
D. Lateral Inhibition
E. Divergence
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/introduction.html 16/17

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Introduction to Neurons and Neuronal Networks | Section 1, Intro Chapter | Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neu…
Question 2 A B C D E
The process by which a neuron summates synaptic excitation and inhibition is called:
A. Plasticity
B. Integration
C. Convergence
D. Pulse frequency modulation
E. Disinhibition
Question 3 A B C D E
The network motif that underlies circadian rhythms is:
A. Temporal summation
B. Spatial summation
C. Feedback inhibition
D. Feedback excitation
E. Lateral inhibition
Question 4 A B C D E
An auto-association network is important for:
A. Reflexes
B. Edge enhancement
C. Memory
D. Locomotion
E. Neuronal oscillations
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/introduction.html 17/17



1/7/25, 2:28 AM Genetics and Neuronal Disease (Section 1, Chapter 15) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depart…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 1: Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology
Search
Chapter 15: Genetics and Neuronal Disease
Andrew Bean, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
Revised 25 July 2020
15.1 The Human Genome
There are approximately 20,000 genes in the human genome.
The human genome possesses about 3 x 109 nucleotides.
Genes are 1-200,000 kb in size (average 10 kb).
Genes have exons (coding sequences) and introns (noncoding sequence found between exons).
It includes 22 autosomes plus X and Y (sex) chromosomes.
Genes are arranged linearly on chromosomes.
Table I
Perspectives on the Number of Genes and the Genetic Distance in the
Human Genome
Genetic and physical map of the X chromosome. Association of a trait with a position on a given chromosome is a critical step in
gene identification. The relationship between genetic loci is measured on a genetic map as the frequency of recombination events
between the loci. On physical maps relationships between loci are measured in nucleotides. The genetic and physical maps have the
same linear sequence although the distances are not correlated. After narrowing the chromosomal localization, a candidate gene
can be localized on a genetic map that contains marker genes known to map to that chromosomal region. Subsequently, the gene
can be localized on a physical map that allows delineation of its position with a higher degree of resolution.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter15.html 1/7

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Genetics and Neuronal Disease (Section 1, Chapter 15) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depart…
Table II
Gene Identification Enables Therapeutic
and Diagnostic Possibilities by Increased
Understanding of Protein Function,
Mutation Identification, and Expression
Patterns
Figure 15.1
15.2 There are Four Major Routes to Gene Identification
1. Functional Cloning - know the function of the gene, purify protein, clone
2. Candidate Gene - identify a potential candidate gene based on mechanism of the primary pathology
3. Positional Cloning - identify gene without prior knowledge of gene function, solely based on mapping
4. Positional Candidate - identify Expressed Sequence Tag (EST) or cDNA and compare its chromosomal localization with a
disease locus map
Table III
Examples of Gene Identification
Functional Cloning Candidate Gene Positional Cloning Positional Candidate
Identification of a gene
Survey of previously
Identification of the based on its map
identified genes that Identification of the
target gene based on position and on the
seem to perform the gene based on its map
knowledge of its availability of candidate
function altered in the position in the genome.
function. genes mapped to the
disease.
same region.
Knowledge of the Mapping of both the
Mapping of the
phenylalanine Identification of Marfan syndrome locus
Duchenne muscular
hydroxylase amino acid mutations in the and the fibrillin gene to
dystrophy locus to Xp21
Human sequence and screening rhodopsin gene from 15q and identification of
and cloning of the
of cDNA libraries using patients with retinitis mutations in the fibrillin
dystrophin gene from
degenerate pigmentosa. gene from patients with
this region.
oligonucleotides. Marfan syndrome.
Identification of Mapping of the leptin
Mapping of the shaker-1
Screening of an mutations in the β receptor to the region of
locus and cloning of the
expression library with subunit of rod cGMP the diabetes mutation
Mouse mutated myosin VII
antibodies to identify phosphodiesterase in the and identification of
gene from the critical
the tyrosinase gene. mouse retinal abnormal splicing of this
region.
degeneration mutation. gene in diabetic mice.
15.3 Homologous Recombination
1. Two homologous chromosomes pair and crossover events (recombinations) occur between homologous chromatids.
2. Homologous chromosomes segregate.
3. Duplicate chromosomes segregate yielding cells containing only one copy of each homologous chromosome.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter15.html 2/7

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Genetics and Neuronal Disease (Section 1, Chapter 15) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depart…
Figure 15.2
A recombination frequency of 1% (1 cM or 1 centimorgan) means that
two genes recombine on average once in every 100 meiotic events.
This is equal to about 1000kb (1 Mb) of DNA sequence.
Analysis of recombination frequencies among genes establishes their
linear order and the distance between them.
Genes that are close to each other on a chromosome tend to be
inherited together. This allows for the use of polymorphic loci near a
candidate gene to be used as markers to examine whether they
cosegregate with a phenotype (see linkage analysis below).
Association of a marker allele with a disease gene. A mutation (blue
line) takes place that produces a disease gene. This mutation occurs in
a DNA background that contains other polymorphisms. During
subsequent meiotic events allelic markers that are further away from
the mutation will segregate away from it, while those that are close by
will cosegregate, allowing an association between the disease gene and
the cosegregating polymorphic markers. The associated region will
depend on the number of meiotic events occurring after the mutation
and the probability of recombination events in this stretch of DNA.
Figure 15.3
15.4 Patterns of Mendelian Inheritance
Autosomal dominant-phenotype with one mutant gene copy
Autosomal recessive-phenotype with two mutant gene copies
X-linked e.g., disease affects males and is not passed from father to son
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter15.html 3/7

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Genetics and Neuronal Disease (Section 1, Chapter 15) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depart…
15.5 Genetic (linkage) Mapping
A procedure by which any genetic trait is localized in the genome based on its segregation pattern with another marker or set of
markers.
Recombination of homologous chromosomal segments
Frequency of recombination events depends on length of segments, the specific nucleotide sequence and its genomic location,
and whether the event takes place in the male or female.
The consequence of recombination is that different offspring receive equal, but not identical, genetic information from each
parent.
The genetic mapping of an unknown locus is established by examining the frequency with which it cosegregates with other
previously mapped genetic markers. Mapping of anonymous markers and genes has allowed the construction of a fairly complete
human genetic map. A number of disease genes with Mendelian phenotypes have been localized on the human linkage map to allow
positional cloning. This has been helpful for linkage studies with traits that do not obey simple Mendelian patterns of inheritance.
Linkage analysis is a sequential procedure where data is collected until linkage is detected or refuted. Linkage is based on a LOD
score-a statistical evaluation of a set of data that examines the probability of joint segregation of two markers with a given
recombination distance under the assumption of linkage or no linkage.
15.6 Applications of a Linkage Map
establish the genetic basis of traits
predict risk for disease
localize hereditary disorders to specific regions of the genome
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter15.html 4/7

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Genetics and Neuronal Disease (Section 1, Chapter 15) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depart…
clone genes by positional cloning
study gene conservation across species and chromosomal evolution
15.7 Factors Affecting Linkage Mapping of a Disease
Trait
penetrance-probability that a carrier will have the phenotype
frequency of the disease gene in the population (Mendelian < 0.1%)
age of onset variability
The large majority of human diseases are NOT Mendelian (multigenic).
Familial aggregation of some genes (e.g., twins studies in schizophrenia)
suggests both genetic and environmental factors contribute.
15.8 Proving a Candidate Gene is Causally Mutated
DNA sequence comparisons of affected and unaffected individuals
Gene expression patterns
Multiple mutant alleles
Phylogenetic (cross-species) comparisons
Using a transgenic or knockout approach in the mouse
These are functional approaches but do not give much molecular insight
into the mechanisms by which the mutated gene produces the aberrant
phenotype. Dissection of the role of the candidate gene product and Figure 15.4
alterations in cellular function due to a given mutation must rely on General strategy for linkage mapping
examination of the function of the deduced protein using molecular and cell
biological techniques.
Table V
Identification of Human Disease Genes
Disease Defective Function
Diseases caused by previously known proteins:
Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Proteolipoprotein Component of CNS myelin
Gerstmann-Straussler (in some
Prion protein Unknown
familial forms)
Ryanodine
Malignant hyperthermia Calcium release channel in muscle
receptor
Retinitis pigmentosa (in some
Rhodopsin Photoreceptor pigment
autosomal dominant forms)
Muscle-specific
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis Generation of action potential
sodium channel
Dutch cerebral amyloidosis Beta amyloid Unknown
Alzheimer disease (in some
Beta amyloid Unknown
familial cases with early onset)
Disease Defective Function
Diseases caused by previously unknown proteins:
Nuclear phosphoprotein, "tumor
Retinoblastoma RB
suppressor"
Structural protein associated with
Duchenne muscular dystrophy Dystrophin
plasma membrane
Cystic fibrosis CFTR Chloride channel or channel regulator
Neurofibromatosis type 1 NF1 peptide GTPase activating protein
15.9 Single Gene or Polygenic?
How can it be determined whether a disease results from mutations in a single gene or multiple genes (polygenic)? Likely single
gene diseases are those in which a single biochemical step is altered (e.g., some lipid storage disorders in which the inactivity of an
enzyme leads to the accumulation of a precursor). Highly complex disorders (e.g., schizophrenia) are likely to be polygenic because
of the wide-ranging disease phenotype.
Huntington's disease-single gene
Parkinson's disease-single gene
Spinocerebellar ataxia-single gene
Lipid storage disorders e.g., Tay-Sachs, Battens, Metachromatic Leukodystrophy-single genes
Alzheimer's disease-likely polygenic
Schizophrenia-likely polygenic
15.10 Mapping Complex Traits
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter15.html 5/7

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Genetics and Neuronal Disease (Section 1, Chapter 15) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depart…
Most traits are complex (non-Mendelian). Therefore, in order to attempt to identify genes, two successful strategies have been
employed:
Define a subtype that shows near-Mendelian inheritance
Alzheimer's Disease (AD)
Individuals have been identified who possess early- or late-onset AD phenotype. The early-onset phenotype exhibits
near-Mendelian patterns of inheritance. Three genes and one locus were isolated: Amyloid precursor protein (APP),
Presenilin-1 (PS-1), Presenilin-2 (PS-2), and apolipoprotein E (ApoE). APP and PS-1 were isolated from early-onset
linkage studies while ApoE was from late-onset studies. PS-2 was identified from an ethnic isolate.
Study families found in an isolated population where the disease incidence is high (many recombination events)
Huntington's Disease
Huntington's disease follows an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. However, isolation of the gene underlying
this disease was only possible by examining an isolated family in the Lake Maracaibo region of Venezuela. This family
has 12,000 individuals, 258 have the disease, 1227 have 50% risk, 2885 have 25% risk and all are descendants from
one woman who lived in the early 1800s. Linkage mapping enabled the localization of a single gene, the Huntington
gene, that codes for the huntingtin protein. Mutations in the gene result in expanded triplet (CAG) repeats with the
number of CAGs proportional to severity of symptoms which are motor and cognitive.
Figure 15.5
Disorders affecting midbrain dopamine neurons include Parkinson's disease and Huntington's disease. Huntington's disease is a
single gene disease resulting from a mutation in the gene coding for huntingtin. In Huntington's disease, a population of neurons in
the striatum degenerate presumably due to the presence of a mutated huntingtin protein. The mechanism by which this mutated
protein produces cell death is being intensely studied but is not yet clear. The symptoms of Parkinson's disease result from the
degeneration of midbrain dopamine neurons in the substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area that project to the striatum and
nucleus accumbens. A candidate gene has been isolated but does not account for the entire phenotype.
15.11 Gene Therapy
Understanding that a particular gene underlies a phenotype is the first step in trying to provide therapeutic benefits to patients
carrying a mutation. However, there are considerable obstacles to overcome between finding the gene and being able to "fix" the
mutation. The strategy employed to functionally "fix" mutations leading to inactive or partially active proteins involves supplying the
"correct" gene to the cells needing to produce the inactive protein.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter15.html 6/7

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Genetics and Neuronal Disease (Section 1, Chapter 15) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depart…
Figure 15.6 Figure 15.7
The general strategy involved in "fixing" a mutant gene.
The major problem is how to get the corrected gene into the appropriate cells. In many cases a defective viral vector is used that
enables entry into cells but lacks the ability to self replicate (Figure 15.6). A minigene is constructed that contains the "correct"
coding region of the wild type protein along with additional sequences necessary for its propagation. The minigene is packaged and
modified cells are made that contain viral particles that make the corrected protein. These cells are then injected into the patient.
Intracranial injection (Figure 15.7) can be used along with various delivery methods (e.g., viral vectors, liposomes) to enable
targeting to neural tissues. Other injection sites can be used for appropriate tissue targeting.
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter15.html 7/7



1/7/25, 2:28 AM Neuropeptides and Nitric Oxide | Section 1, Chapter 14 | Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depar…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 1: Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology
Search
Chapter 14: Neuropeptides and Nitric Oxide
M. Neal Waxham, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
Revised 25 July 2020
14.1 Introduction to Neuropeptides and Nitric Oxide
Classical neurotransmitters (e.g., glutamate and ACh) work by the directional transfer of information between presynaptic release
sites and postsynaptic clusters of receptors. The process is generally well organized spatially with some, but very limited, "spill-
over" of transmitter between neighboring synapses. The situation is quite different for transmission mediated by neuropeptides and
nitric oxide (NO). These molecules ignore directionality of information flow and instead influence a volume of area from their point
of release. This feature is loosely analogous to the release of peptide hormones into the blood stream, which can be carried to
distant sites to produce their effects. For example, NO can be produced in a postsynaptic neuron and diffuse back to the
presynaptic neuron or to other neighboring neurons affecting the subsequent release of transmitter. This property is termed
retrograde transmission, since the signal travels in the opposite direction (post- to pre-) as compared to the classical
directionality of neurotransmission.
14.2 Neuropeptides
Many neuropeptides were originally described as hormones (e.g., somatostatin and cholecystokinin), although once characterized
they were subsequently also found in neurons within the CNS. Neuropeptides typically produce neuronal responses with slow onset
and long duration (Figure 14.1), and every characterized neuropeptide receptor falls into the GPCR (G-protein coupled receptor)
class. For comparison, Figure 14.1 shows typical responses produced by the action of a classical neurotransmitter (glutamate)
acting at an ionotropic receptor and a neuropeptide. An action potential elicited in neuron 1 (in green), a glutamate releasing
neuron, produces the fast (5 msec) EPSP typical of glutamate mediated synaptic transmission. In contrast, an action potential
elicited in neuron 2 (purple) that releases neuropeptide produces a slow onset (5 sec to peak) and long-duration (10 sec) EPSP.
These slow EPSPs are typical of neuropeptide actions since all neuropeptide receptors are G-protein coupled.
Figure 14.1
In addition, many neuropeptides do not produce an obvious electrophysiological change in the postsynaptic neuron. For example,
an action potential in neuron 3 (Figure 14.1; pink) produces no response in the postsynaptic neuron even though one can confirm
through other means that neuropeptides were released. However, changes have occurred in the postsynaptic neuron as revealed in
the example shown in the panels labeled "C". If one first measures the glutamate response (C1) by stimulating neuron 1, a typical
response is seen. Stimulation of neuron 3 produces no response (C2) as before. However, if neuron 1 is stimulated again after the
stimulation of neuron 3, the EPSP measured in the postsynaptic neuron is enhanced (C3) (the original EPSP is the solid line and the
EPSP following neuron 3 stimulation is the dashed line). Thus, the neuropeptide released from neuron 3 altered the postsynaptic
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter14.html 1/8

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Neuropeptides and Nitric Oxide | Section 1, Chapter 14 | Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depar…
neuron's response to another neurotransmitter. These neuropeptides are said to be neuromodulators since their effects are to
potentiate or depress the effects of a second transmitter. Other examples of such heterosynaptic plasticity are described in Chapter
7, Part 2.
14.3 Classification of Peptides by Families
Neuropeptides can be grouped into families based on similarities in their amino acid sequences (Tables I and II).
Table I
Neuropeptide Families
Tachykinins: substance P, bombesin, substance
Insulins: insulin, insulin-like growth factors
Somatostatins: somatostatin, pancreatic polypeptide
Gastrins: gastrin, cholecystokinin
Opioids: opiocortins, enkephalins, dynorphin
For example, opiates are grouped as a family due to the identical amino acid sequence Tyr-Gly-Gly-Phe--(Table II) found at the N-
terminus of each.
Table II
Opiate Family-Sequence Identity in Italics
Name Amino Acid Sequence
Leu-enkephalin Tyr-Gly-Gly-Phe-Leu-OH
Met-enkephalin Tyr-Gly-Gly-Phe-Met-OH
Tyr-Gly-Gly-Phe-Met-Thr-Ser-Glu-Lys-
Ser-Gln-Thr-Pro-Leu-Val-Thr-Leu-
Beta-endorphin
Phe-Lys-Asn-Ala-Ile-Val-Lys-Asn-Ala-
His-Lys-Gly-Gln-His-OH
Tyr-Gly-Gly-Phe-Leu-Arg-Arg-Ile-Arg-
Dynorphin
Pro-Lys-Leu-Lys-Trp-Asp-Asn-Gln-OH
14.4 Biosynthesis and Regulation
Neuropeptides are derived from larger precursors by proteolytic
processing. They are all initially synthesized within the soma (Figure
14.2). Precursors are initially formed by translation on polyribosomes
attached to the endoplasmic reticulum near the cell body. From there,
they progress through the Golgi apparatus where further modifications
take place, including glycosylation. They are then packaged into
secretory granules that are transported to terminals by fast axonal
transport. Fast is a relative term, however, and due to the relatively
long distances that some neuropeptides must travel. Replenishing the
pool of releasable neuropeptide might require many hours. During the
transport to the nerve terminal, proteases that are packaged within the
vesicle begin to cleave the precursor neuropeptide into its final mature
form. This processing is essential for the activation of the
neuropeptides since the precursors are biologically inactive. At least
three types of processing occurs within the vesicles (Figure 14.2; click
boxes for more details). First, an endopeptidase cleaves the
precursor to generate two new products (First box in axon). For many
Figure 14.2
precursors this cleavage occurs after basic residues (like Lys and Arg)
and is accomplished by trypsin-like proteases. Next, although not for
every neuropeptide, a carboxypeptidase cleaves the basic residues from the C-terminus of the new peptide (Second box in axon).
Finally, a third enzyme converts the COOH (carboxy) group of a Gly residue, found at the C-terminus of many neuropeptides, to an
NH (amide) group to produce the mature, active form of the neuropeptide.
2
14.5 Multiple Mechanisms are Utilized to Produce the Diversity of Neuropeptides
Most proteins are produced from mRNA molecules that are spliced from precursor RNAs into their final forms in the nucleus.
Differential splicing is one way that a neuron uses to diversify the production of different types of neuropeptides. One well-known
example is the substance P mRNA that normally also includes mRNA encoding substance K. The substance K portion of the mRNA
can be differentially spliced out so that the resulting mRNA can produce only substance P (click on box over nucleus in Figure 14.2)
Neuropeptides are produced from a longer precursor
protein by proteolytic processing. An excellent example is
the opioid family of peptides (e.g., the processing of
proopiomelanocorticotropin, POMC and Enkephalin; see
Figure 14.3). As noted, the proteolytic processing takes
place within the transport vesicles and most often occurs
by cleaving the precursor on the N-terminal side of basic
residues (arginine and lysine), although other cleavage
sites have also been identified. In some instances, such as
the Enkephalin precursor protein, multiple copies of the
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter14.html 2/8

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Neuropeptides and Nitric Oxide | Section 1, Chapter 14 | Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depar…
same final bioactive peptide are present. The one
Figure 14.3 precursor molecule shown at the top of Figure 14.3
contains six copies of Met-enkephalin (ME) and one copy
of Leu-enkephalin (LE).
Diversity can thus be generated by altering the sequence of the cleavage sites by differential splicing, by producing and/or
packaging different proteases (recognizing different sequences for cleavage) into the transport vesicles, or by hiding a proteolytic
site by post-translational modifications. An example of the latter is that a specific cleavage site might be hidden by the addition of a
carbohydrate side chain that sterically blocks the protease from having access to that site. Another common finding is that a single
precursor molecule will contain several different neuropeptides (see Figure 14.3) and therefore the types of processing that occur
ultimately determines which neuropeptide is released by the neuron. The POMC precursor protein can be cleaved to form ACTH
(orange) and β-lipoprotein (light blue) that each can be further cleaved to generate additional bioactive neuropeptides (Figure
14.3). For example, the β-lipoprotein (light blue) can be further cleaved into both γ-lipoprotein (green stripes) and β-endorphin
(dark blue). Again, depending on the processing that takes place, the same precursor protein can be modified to produce
neuropeptides with dramatically different biological responses.
14.6 Release
Peptides are released by calcium-dependent exocytosis with some important differences
from the release of classical neurotransmitters. Typically, vesicles releasing neuropeptides
are much larger than those that contain small molecule neurotransmitters (e.g.,
glutamate) and do not require a presynaptic specialization for release (see the electron
micrograph in Figure 14.4). In contrast to the small vesicles that contain glutamate, the
large vesicles do not appear docked at the membrane. This observation is consistent with
the idea that small molecule neurotransmitters produce brief, local effects (at synaptic
connections), whereas neuropeptides produce slow, long-lasting effects often
encompassing a significant area surrounding the site of release. Also, recall that since
neuropeptides are synthesized in the cell soma and not locally at the synapse, if their
supply is exhausted from sustained release it might take several hours to replenish the
releasable pools. For example, a motor neuron, with its cell body in the spinal cord and
the synapse in the foot, has an axon as long as one meter. Utilizing fast axonal
transport it would potentially take more than a day for a newly synthesized neuropeptide
to arrive at this synapse from the soma. It should also be evident that endogenous pain-
killing neuropeptides, like beta-endorphin, could be "used-up" in times of persistent
stimulation leading to situations where pain can no longer be controlled by endogenous
mechanisms.
A typical mature neuron will often release one small molecule neurotransmitter and one or
more neuropeptides (as in the example shown in Figure 14.4). If more than one
neuropeptide is released they most often come from the same single precursor molecule.
An example is the co-release of both ACh and calcitonin gene-related peptide from spinal
motor neurons. CGRP activates adenylate cyclase, raising cAMP levels, and potentiates
the force of contraction produced by ACh activation of the nicotinic ACh receptor. In this
case, the neuropeptide is modulatory as described in Figure 14.1. However, in this
instance, the effect potentiates muscle contraction instead of increasing the magnitude of
the EPSP. In both examples, the potentiated response is due to increased sensitivity of the
system to a constant amount of released neurotransmitter.
Figure 14.4
14.6 Termination of Action
Neuropeptides are slowly removed from the extracellular space; a feature which also contributes to their relatively long lasting
effects. Inactivation occurs by both diffusion and breakdown by extracellular proteases. No evidence has been found for peptide
re-uptake as a means of terminating their action.
14.7 Receptors are all G-protein Linked
All known neuropeptide receptors produce their effects by altering the levels of intracellular second messengers. These receptors
are seven transmembrane spanning proteins that are linked through G proteins (GPCRs) to alter the activation of other cellular
enzymes. This property is consistent with neuropeptides inducing a slower response and is well suited for a modulatory role. One
important distinction between small and neuropeptide molecule transmitters is that neuropeptide receptors have a high affinity for
binding (nanomolar) as opposed to micro- or millimolar affinities measured for small molecule neurotransmitters (like glutamate).
As neuropeptides are not released directionally into the confined volume of a synapse, their concentrations do not achieve very high
levels and the receptors then must have high affinities to react to these small concentrations. This high affinity slows the
dissociation of the neuropeptide from its receptor and also contributes to the persistent effects of these molecules.
14.8 Nitric Oxide (NO)
Nitric oxide has gained widespread attention as the founding member of a new class of gaseous messenger molecules. NO is the
active molecule that sublingual nitroglycerin produces to increase vasodilation in the relief of angina. Other important biological
effects of NO are now recognized. For example, in the nervous system, NO is important in the regulation of cerebral blood flow, in
the modulation of neurotransmission, and in toxicity associated with various pathologic states.
14.9 Characteristics of NO
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter14.html 3/8

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Neuropeptides and Nitric Oxide | Section 1, Chapter 14 | Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depar…
Summary of NO's Properties
1. Gas that freely diffuses through membranes
2. Short-lived with a half-life measured in seconds
3. Highly reactive free radical
4. Toxic at high concentrations
NO is a short-lived gas not to be confused with the relatively stable anesthetic gas nitrous oxide (laughing gas). NO is actually a
free radical and is therefore a highly reactive compound. Some of its toxic effects are likely due to NO reacting with superoxide to
produce the destructive radical peroxynitrate. NO is considered an unconventional neurotransmitter because it is not released by
exocytosis and its action does not occur through conventional receptor molecules.
As mentioned previously, the typical description of neuronal communication considers transmission to be unidirectional. A
presynaptic neurotransmitter is released that produces changes in the postsynaptic neuron. Several compounds (like neuropeptides
and NO) produced in postsynaptic neurons diffuse into the local environment and affect the surrounding cells. Since NO is a freely
diffusible gas it has the potential to travel quickly in any direction from its point of production. For example, if produced in a
postsynaptic cell because of glutamate receptor stimulation, NO could be released into the local environment and send a signal
back to the presynaptic neuron (Figure 14.5). This type of activity is referred to as retrograde signaling since the signal travels in
a retrograde direction from the postsynaptic to the presynaptic neuron.
Figure 14.5
Figure 14.6
Figures 14.5, 14.6, and 14.7 summarize the main aspects of NO synthesis. In this example, glutamate is released from the
presynaptic terminal that binds to NMDA receptors on the postsynaptic membrane, causing them to open and permitting Ca2+-
influx. The Ca2+ activates calmodulin which binds to and activates the enzyme nitric oxide synthase (NOS). Using arginine as a
substrate, NOS produces NO and a second reaction product citrulline. The NO is then free to diffuse into the environment and
interact with the presynaptic terminal which initially released the glutamate or any other cell in the local environment. Recognize
that any process that elevates intracellular Ca2+ will potentially activate NOS. Glutamate activation of NMDA receptors is just one
well-documented example.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter14.html 4/8

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Neuropeptides and Nitric Oxide | Section 1, Chapter 14 | Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depar…
Figure 14.7
14.10 Synthesis by Nitric Oxide Synthase (NOS) and Release
NO is produced by the enzyme nitric oxide synthase (NOS). This enzyme is found in a subpopulation of neurons (1-2% of
neurons in cortex) and is found in most all endothelial cells. At least one form of NOS in these cells is dependent on calcium and
calmodulin for activation as indicated in Figures 14.5, 14.6, and 14.7. It also contains cofactors similar to cytochrome P-450. These
cofactors are NADPH (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate, FAD (flavin adenine mononucleotide) and FMN (flavin
mononucleotide). These cofactors are essential for the transfer of electrons that produces the unstable and short-lived product NO.
The substrate in this reaction is the common amino acid arginine and the products are citrulline and NO (Figure 14.5). Because of
NO's short lifetime it is extraordinarily difficult to measure directly. However, in experimental preparations, there is an excellent
correlation between the application of NMDA, which increases intraneuronal Ca2+ and activates NOS, with the production of the
additional product of NOS's enzymatic activity, citrulline (see Figure 14.8). Citrulline production is a reliable indicator of NO
production. It is also possible to block the production of citrulline (and NO) by feeding cells the non-metabolizable substrate for
NOS termed methyl arginine (Figure 14.9), and such compounds have been used to reduce the production of NO and terminate its
biological effects.
Figure 14.8 Figure 14.9
14.11 "Receptors" for NO
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter14.html 5/8

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Neuropeptides and Nitric Oxide | Section 1, Chapter 14 | Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depar…
Figure 14.10
One of the main targets for NO appears to be the enzyme guanylyl cyclase. This discovery was made indirectly by monitoring the
accumulation of the NOS product citrulline while also monitoring for the production of cGMP, the product of the enzyme guanylyl
cyclase (Figures 14.8 and 14.9). In this experiment NMDA was added to a neuronal preparation to activate NOS. NOS utilizes
arginine as a substrate to produce NO and as mentioned, if a non-hydrolyzable analog like methyl-arginine is added to the system,
citrulline and cGMP accumulation were found to terminate in the same dose-dependent fashion. These strong correlations led to the
discovery that guanylyl cyclase is a main NO target.
Guanylyl cyclase is an unusual enzyme because it has a heme ring with an associated iron molecule as part of its structure. NO
activates this enzyme by binding to iron in the heme, initiating production of cyclic GMP from GTP (Figure 14.10) through
conformational changes in the enzyme. cGMP then activates a cGMP-dependent protein kinase and other enzymes described below.
The spectrum of effects produced by the activation of cGMP-dependent protein kinase are only now becoming understood.
14.12 Biological Effects of NO
NO produces a wide variety of biological effects. Unfortunately, we are particularly ignorant of NO's role in modulating cellular
processes in the nervous system. NO's role in regulating the vasculature is well documented and it appears to play a similarly
important role in the nervous system.
14.13 Vasodilator
Figure 14.11
Click here to see an enlarged view of
this image.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter14.html 6/8

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Neuropeptides and Nitric Oxide | Section 1, Chapter 14 | Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depar…
Under normal circumstances, NO contributes to the control of blood flow through the cerebrovasculature. A rapid feedback
mechanism necessarily exists to supply more active areas of the brain with the necessary nutrients. This mechanism is necessary
because of the brain's feeble reserve of energy stores. NO is produced in neurons containing NOS that are undergoing sustained
activity. These conditions favor activation of NMDA receptors, which is known to cause NO production. NO diffuses from these
localized areas of high neuronal activity to the surrounding microvasculature (Figure 14.11) causing vasodilatation and increased
blood flow.
Although the exact mechanisms by which NO produces vasodilatation are not yet defined, it is known that activation of cGMP-
dependent protein kinase in smooth muscle cells causes a relaxation of the vessels. Since one of NO's main targets is guanylyl
cyclase (which produces cGMP and activates cGMP-dependent protein kinase), it is presumed that one major pathway for NO's
vasodilatory actions is through cGMP-dependent protein kinase. Activation of this kinase leads indirectly to decreased Ca2+-levels in
the smooth muscle cells and subsequently to the dephosphorylation of the myosin contractile apparatus which causes relaxation
(Figure 14.12). In smooth muscle cells, NO also appears to directly hyperpolarize cells possibly by activating K+-channels, leading
to the secondary closure of Ca2+ channels which also produces muscle relaxation. In conclusion, one of NO's main functions
appears to be integrating the level of neuronal activity with local alterations in cerebral blood flow to maintain adequate perfusion of
metabolically active tissue.
Figure 14.12
14.14 Neuromodulator
NO is also thought to act as a locally diffusible messenger. It is produced by any action that elevates Ca2+ in cells containing NOS,
such as glutamate stimulation of NMDA receptors. Through subsequent activation of guanylyl cyclase and production of cGMP, NO
production influences a variety of secondary processes. These include direct modulation of ion channels, stimulation of cGMP-
dependent protein kinase, and both up-regulation or down-regulation of cAMP-phosphodiesterase. Downstream effects are then
numerous and include up and down regulation of Ca2+ channels, increased excitability (increases neuronal firing rate), increased or
decreased neurotransmitter release, and changes in neuron morphology.
14.15 Toxicity
NO in excess is toxic to cells. However, a paradox exists for NO toxicity. Cells that produce high levels of NO are resistant to its toxic
effects. For example, NO toxicity is used by macrophages and neutrophils as a mechanism to kill tumor cells and bacteria. However,
neither cell type producing NO is susceptible to its damaging effects. This finding is also true for neurons in the central nervous
system. Excess glutamate induces neurotoxicity in the brain and is thought to be the primary cause of neuronal death in diseases
such as Huntington's or Alzheimer's or after acute stroke or trauma. Excess production of NO is thought to play some role in this
neuronal loss due to its toxicity when produced in excess. Interestingly, cells that stain positive for the enzyme NOS are spared in
degenerating areas of the brain affected by these diseases. The resistance of these cells appears to be similar to the resistance of
the immune cells described above.
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
Neuropeptides are present in synaptic terminals because they are:
A. Synthesized in the terminal.
B. Carried by fast axonal transport
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter14.html 7/8

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Neuropeptides and Nitric Oxide | Section 1, Chapter 14 | Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depar…
C. Carried by diffusion
D. Carried by slow axonal transport
E. Taken-up from the extracellular space
Question 2 A B C D E
Nitric Oxide:
A. Has a long life-time
B. Is membrane permeable.
C. Is non-reactive
D. Is also known as laughing gas.
E. Is non-toxic to cells.
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter14.html 8/8



1/7/25, 2:28 AM Amino Acid Neurotransmitters (Section 1, Chapter 13) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Departm…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 1: Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology
Search
Chapter 13: Amino Acid Neurotransmitters
M. Neal Waxham, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
Revised 24 July 2020
13.1 Introduction and Review
Amino acid transmitters provide the majority of excitatory and inhibitory
neurotransmission in the nervous system. The sensory-to-motor neuron
connection in the spinal cord that controls the knee-jerk reflex is an
excellent starting point for illustration. Figure 13.1 shows a
monosynaptic connection in the spinal cord between the sensory neuron
(in green) and the motor neuron innervating the extensor muscle (in
blue).
A single action potential evoked in the sensory neuron produces an
excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) in the extensor motor neuron
(Figure 13.1) of about 1 mV. The same sensory neuron also makes a
synaptic connection with an interneuron (in black) in the spinal cord that
then synapses on the motor neuron (in red) innervating the flexor
muscle. An action potential elicited in the interneuron produces an
inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP) in the flexor motor neuron.
Recall that many EPSPs are needed to drive the motor neuron's resting
potential to the threshold to generate an action potential. These are the
processes of temporal and spatial summation. The neurotransmitters
and the receptors that mediate these and other excitatory and inhibitory
responses are the focus of this section. Excitatory transmission (the
c 2000 UTHSCH
production of EPSPs) is mediated largely by the acidic amino acid
glutamate. Inhibitory neurotransmission (IPSPs) is mediated primarily
Figure 13.1 by glycine in the spinal cord, and a metabolite of glutamate called
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) in the brain.
13.2 Spatial and Morphological Distinctions between Excitatory and Inhibitory Inputs
Neurons receive many thousands of synaptic inputs some excitatory, some inhibitory, and some modulatory. Excitatory synaptic
connections are typically found on the major receiving area of the neuron, the dendrite, and most often on spines that project
from the dendrite (Figure 13.2). These excitatory synapses have identifiable morphological characteristics and are referred to as
Type I (Figure 13.2, box labeled Dendrites). A distinct zone frequently exists in the pre-synaptic terminal of Type I synapses
responsible for the release of vesicles containing glutamate and a corresponding zone under the postsynaptic membrane that
serves to anchor the receptors for glutamate (click on the box for details). In addition, vesicles that contain glutamate are small
(~50 nm in diameter) and tend to have a spherical appearance.
Inhibitory synapses (like those utilizing glycine and GABA) tend to be localized near the neuronal soma and are referred to as
Type II (Figure 13.2, box labeled Axosomatic synapse). Morphologically, the synapses again have specializations for release of
vesicles and for anchoring receptors. However, the zones of contact tend to be smaller than for excitatory synapses (click on the
box for more details). For unknown reasons, the vesicles containing glycine or GABA are often elliptical in shape.
Functionally, the location of these synaptic contacts has profound influences on the postsynaptic neuron. In general, the further
from the cell body, the more the EPSP is attenuated by the passive properties of the membrane (these potentials are not
propagating action potentials; they are synaptic potentials). Therefore, for neurons lacking regenerative processes in their
dendrites, EPSPs that are far from the point of action potential generation (the cell soma and axon hillock) attenuate to a greater
degree than IPSPs which are generated closer to the neuron's soma. Due to this spatial arrangement and the relatively small size of
each EPSP (1 mV), many distant EPSPs must summate to cause the initiation of an action potential. In contrast, fewer local IPSPs
on the cell soma are required to inhibit production of action potentials. On a typical cortical neuron, one might find 10,000
axodendritic excitatory synapses and only 10-50 axosomatic inhibitory synapses.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter13.html 1/8

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Amino Acid Neurotransmitters (Section 1, Chapter 13) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Departm…
13.3 Structure of Amino Acid Transmitters
Initially, amino acids were not considered viable candidates for
neurotransmitters since they are ubiquitous cellular constituents and are
required for protein synthesis. Also, unlike the specific enzymes in neurons
that synthesize ACh and catecholamines, enzymes that synthesize glutamate,
aspartate and glycine are not unique to neurons. Whereas antibodies to
choline acetyltransferase can be used to identify neurons as cholinergic, no
such markers are available for neurons that use the amino acids as
transmitters. Nevertheless, it is now known that amino acids constitute the
major group of substances used for generating excitatory and inhibitory
synaptic potentials in the CNS. Amino acids used for synaptic transmission
are compartmentalized. For example, glutamate to be used as a
neurotransmitter is compartmentalized from metabolic glutamate used for
protein synthesis by packaging the transmitter into synaptic vesicles for
subsequent Ca2+-dependent release.
Figure 13.2
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 13.3
Figure 13.3 illustrates the structure of four key amino acid neurotransmitters. Note that the excitatory amino acids carry two
negative charges from the two carboxylate groups (COO-, red balls) as opposed to one for the inhibitory amino acids. Recognize
that N-methyl-D-Aspartate is a synthetic compound not found in the brain and is technically not a neurotransmitter. It is a highly
useful agonist that can mimic the actions of glutamate on a particular subset of glutamate receptors.
13.4 Biosynthesis of Amino Acid Neurotransmitters
Amino acid neurotransmitters are all products of intermediary metabolism with the exception of GABA. Unlike all the other amino
acid neurotransmitters, GABA is not used in protein synthesis and is produced by an enzyme (glutamic acid decarboxylase; GAD)
uniquely located in neurons. Antibodies to GAD can be used to identify neurons that release GABA.
13.5 Glutamate and Aspartate
Glutamate and aspartate are products of the Kreb's cycle, and both have
excitatory effects in the CNS. They are produced in the mitochondria,
transported into the cytoplasm, and packaged into synaptic vesicles (Figure
13.4). Specific high-affinity enzymes are responsible for packaging glutamate
into vesicles.
The actions of glutamate are terminated by high-affinity uptake systems in
neurons and glia (represented by red cylinders in the neuron and glia
membranes). Under normal circumstances most uptake is back into the
neuron and this glutamate can immediately be pumped into vesicles for
subsequent release. When neuronal activity is high, extracellular glutamate
concentration exceeds the capacity of neuronal uptake. At this point, uptake
systems in glial cells help absorb the excess glutamate. However, glutamate is
not permeable to the plasma membrane. To recycle the glutamate taken up
into glial cells, an enzymatic reaction catalyzed by glutamine synthase
produces glutamine from glutamate (Figure 13.4). Glutamine is freely
permeable to the glial and neuronal plasma membranes and diffuses back into
c 2000 UTHSCH the neuron. The neuronal enzyme glutaminase then metabolizes glutamine
into glutamate where it can then be packaged into synaptic vesicles for
Figure 13.4 another round of release (Figure 13.4).
13.6 Glycine
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter13.html 2/8

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Amino Acid Neurotransmitters (Section 1, Chapter 13) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Departm…
Figure 13.5
Glycine is the main neurotransmitter that mediates the inhibitory actions of spinal cord interneurons. It is also present in lower
amounts throughout the nervous system. Glycine is synthesized from serine in the mitochondria (Figure 13.5). The reaction is
catalyzed by the enzyme serine transhydroxymethylase (Figure 13.5; click on box). Like glutamate, high-affinity uptake
systems remove glycine from the synaptic cleft, which can then be repackaged into vesicles.
The binding of glycine to its receptor on postsynaptic neurons is blocked by the poison strychnine, thus blocking glycine's
inhibitory actions (Figure 13.5). The block of inhibition leads to hyperexcitation and typically a patient with strychnine poisoning
asphyxiates due to an inability to relax the diaphragm. More details on the nature of glycine receptors are provided later in this
chapter. (You can move forward to it now, but be aware that you are advancing FORWARD.)
13.7 GABA
GABA mediates the majority of inhibitory synaptic actions in the CNS. GABA is
synthesized from glutamate in a reaction catalyzed by glutamic acid
decarboxylase (GAD; Figure 13.6). Antibodies to GAD can be used to identify
GABAergic neurons. Like the other amino acid transmitters, GABA's actions are
terminated by high affinity uptake systems in neurons and glia. Neuronal
uptake permits immediate repackaging into vesicles for release. Compared
with glutamate, a more elaborate set of reactions is necessary to return GABA
to the neuron when it is taken up by glial cells. Some of these enzymes are
shared with those for returning released glutamate to neurons described in
Figure 13.4. GABA is first converted back into glutamate by the mitochondrial
enzyme GABA transaminase (GABA-T; Figure 13.6; click on box) using the -
COOH group from alpha-ketoglutarate. This pathway is sometimes referred to
as the "GABA shunt". The glutamate is then converted to glutamine by the
enzyme glutamine synthase and glutamine diffuses back into the neuron.
Finally, glutaminase converts glutamine into glutamate, which can again serve
as a substrate for GAD, completing the cycle.
Figure 13.6
13.8 Ca2+-Dependent Release
All of these amino acid neurotransmitters are released by Ca2+-dependent exocytosis at presynaptic specializations as discussed
in Chapter 8, Part 7 and Chapter 10, Part 4. All vesicles (both small molecule and neuropeptide) also contain ATP that is co-released
when these vesicles fuse with the membrane. ATP and its degradation product adenosine are themselves neurotransmitter
molecules (termed purinergic transmission) that can also modify the pre- or postsynaptic cell's response if the appropriate
receptors are present. For example, adenosine is a potent inhibitor of neurotransmitter release from presynaptic terminals.
13.9 Receptors for Amino Acid Neurotransmitters
Receptors for each of the amino acid neurotransmitters can either directly open an ion channel (ionotropic) or couple to a G-
protein (G-protein coupled receptor; GPCR) except for glycine. There is no known GPCR for glycine and all of glycine's effects are
mediated through an ion channel permeable to Cl-. In contrast, glutamate and GABA can produce fast responses by directly
opening ion channels and can produce slow responses by activating receptors coupled to G-proteins. Examples of ionotropic
receptors and GPCRs are compared in Figures 13.7 and 13.8, respectively.
13.10 Glutamate Receptors
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter13.html 3/8

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Amino Acid Neurotransmitters (Section 1, Chapter 13) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Departm…
There are at least three distinct types of glutamate receptors. Two are ionotropic since glutamate binding directly opens an ion
channel and the other is a GPCR, producing alterations in intracellular messengers (Figures 13.7 and 13.8). These three distinct
types of glutamate receptors have been characterized by using agonists that specifically activate each type. The agonists and the
subset of glutamate receptors they activate are termed:
1. NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate, a synthetic compound that acts as an agonist for this particular glutamate receptor
subtype),
2. non-NMDA (also known as kainate/AMPA receptors since these agonists activate this receptor subtype), and
3. G-protein coupled glutamate receptor.
c 2000 UTHSCH
Na+ Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
K+
K+
K+
K+ K+
K+
PLAY c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 13.7 Figure 13.8
Ionotropic glutamate receptors open channels that cause the cell to depolarize and are therefore excitatory (driving the membrane
potential towards firing an action potential). The reversal potential (near 0 mV) of the EPSP indicates that glutamate opens
receptors selectively permeable to cations (Na+, K+, and Ca2+).
Opening of non-NMDA receptors causes the majority of the excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) in the nervous system. This
receptor is mainly permeable to Na+ and K+ (Figure 13. 9). The structure of non-NMDA receptors loosely resembles the nicotinic
ACh receptor, although glutamate receptors have some unique features. Four subunits, each having only three membrane spanning
segments (as opposed to four for the nicotinic ACh receptor), combine to produce the functional receptor. Many different subunit
isoforms have been cloned and characterized and mixing different subunits can significantly alter the properties of the mature non-
NMDA receptor. As one example, some subunit mixtures are permeable to Ca2+ as well as Na+ and K+. Although it is premature to
dwell on these details, future development of drugs that bind to specific glutamate receptor subtypes will find important clinical
applications.
Non-NMDA Na+ Ca2+ Na+
2+
Na+ Ca2+ Na+
Ca2+
Ca2+Na+
Mg2+Na+
NC aa
+
Na+
Ca2+Na+ Mg2+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Cytoplasm
Cytoplasm K+
K+ K+ K+
K+
K+ K+ K+ K+ K+
K+
K+ K+ K+ K+ K+
K+ PLAY
K+
PLAY
- Closed
- Closed - Blocked ( + Glutamate)
- Open ( + Glutamate) - Open ( + Glutamate + Depolorization)
2000UTHSCH
Figure 13.9 Figure 13.10
NMDA receptors are unique in the nervous system and exhibit two important characteristics. First, they have a high permeability to
Ca2+ (although they are also permeable to Na+ and K+), and when they open significant increases in the level of Ca2+ can be
detected in the neuron (Figure 13.10). Increased levels of Ca2+ activate a wide variety of enzyme systems that alter both the
short- and long-term response of the neurons (recall that activation of this receptor is required for the induction of long-term
potentiation). Glycine, which is normally always present in the extracellular space, is also required for the NMDA receptor to open.
Second, NMDA receptors require both ligand binding and membrane depolarization to open. The channel associated with the NMDA
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter13.html 4/8

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Amino Acid Neurotransmitters (Section 1, Chapter 13) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Departm…
receptor binds Mg2+, stopping ions from flowing through the channel (Figure 13.10). Mg2+ can be displaced from the channel by
depolarizing the membrane. This unique property imparts to the receptor the capacity to sense the membrane potential and open
only when the neuron is depolarized. The ability to sense presynaptic activity (through the binding of released glutamate) and
postsynaptic activity (through sensing membrane potential) means the NMDA receptor associates the two activities. This property
(associativity) fulfills one of the central criteria for a molecule involved in learning. Apparently, Ca2+-influx through the NMDA
receptor initiates a set of biochemical changes so that the neuron remembers the conjoint activity and responds differently when
activated in the future. Like the non-NMDA receptor, the mature NMDA receptor is constructed from a mixture of different subunits,
again each having three transmembrane segments.
13.11 Receptors-GABA and Glycine
A
GABA and glycine ionotropic receptors are selectively permeable to Cl- (reversal potential near -70 mV). When they open, they
cause the neuron to hyperpolarize and therefore drive the membrane potential away from the threshold for firing an action
potential. GABA, like glutamate, also binds to and activates a GPCR. In contrast, glycine only binds to ionotropic receptors.
13.12 GABA Receptors
The ionotropic and G-protein coupled GABA receptors are referred to as GABA and GABA , respectively. Some of the main
A B
features of GABA and GABA receptors are as follows:
A B
Table I
GABA Receptors
GABA GABA
A B
Largely Postsynaptic Largely Presynaptic
Opens a Cl- Channel Alters Second Messengers
Slow Response (300-500 msec
Rapid Response (15 msec)
and longer)
Multisubunit, Binds Modulators Single Subunit
13.13 Characteristics of GABA Receptor
A
c 2000 UTHSCH
Figure 13.11
The GABA receptor is composed of five subunits that each contain four membrane spanning domains. GABA subunits are highly
A A
related to those of the nicotinic ACh receptor. Important differences exist to produce a channel that permits the permeation of the
negatively charged Cl- ion. Specifically, there are positively charged amino acids placed at strategic positions within the channel
portion of the receptors that permit Cl- passage. The different subunits of the GABA receptor are responsible for the binding of
A
different drugs.
1. GABA binds predominantly to the alpha subunit (Figure 13.11).
2. Benzodiazepines (like Valium and Librium) bind to the gamma subunit.
3. Barbiturates (Phenobarbital and secobarbital) bind to both the alpha and beta subunits.
4. Picrotoxin blocks ion flow through the receptor (Figure 13.11).
The pharmacology of GABA receptors is complex and clinically important. When GABA is released into the synapse, it binds to a
A
population of the available receptors, but typically not all of them (Figure 13.12). If benzodiazepines are present, the effectiveness
of GABA binding to its receptor is increased significantly (Figure 13.13). Therefore, effective doses of benzodiazepines enhance the
ability of GABA to hyperpolarize the neuron by increasing the number of GABA receptors that open at a fixed concentration of
GABA. Inhibition is produced by increasing the amount of Cl- that flows into the neuron (Figure 13.12 and 13.13). Recognize that
benzodiazepines themselves do not open the receptor but simply enhance GABA binding. Barbiturates also produce their sedative
effects by increasing the effectiveness of GABA binding to its receptor. The naturally occurring toxin called picrotoxin is a potent
inhibitor of the GABA receptor and works by preventing Cl- flow through the receptor (Figure 13.11).
A
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter13.html 5/8

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Amino Acid Neurotransmitters (Section 1, Chapter 13) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Departm…
CC Cll --
l-
ClC -l CC- ll -- C Cl l-
-
C Cl l- C- lC -Cl-
l-
C Cl-
l-
CC ll -- C Cl-
C l-l-
C CC l l-l -- ClC -l- ClC -l- ClCC -ll -- CC l-l C- l-C Cl-
l-
Cl- Cl-
Cl-
Cl-
PLAY PLAY
Figure 13.12 Figure 13.13
13.14 Glycine Receptor
The glycine receptor, like the GABA receptor also permits the influx of Cl- into neurons and displays a reversal potential near -70
A
mV. This Cl--permeable glycine receptor can be blocked by the rat poison strychnine. The mature glycine receptor is constructed
from mixtures of at least two subunits each of which has four membrane spanning domains.
13.15 G-protein Coupled Glutamate and GABA Receptors
B
Glutamate GPCRs are members of a large family of receptors that couple with G proteins to produce their effects. These receptors
like those for serotonin, norepinephrine, epinephrine, muscarinic ACh, and dopamine, produce the large majority of their effects
through alterations in the activity of metabolic enzymes and not by directly opening ion channels in the membranes. All of these
receptors are single polypeptides that span the membrane seven times (See Fig. 11.10. and Fig. 13.8).
The glutamate GPCR's best known effects are the activation of phospholipase C which generates inositol-trisphosphate (IP ) and
3
diacylglycerol (DAG) from the precursor lipid phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate (See Figure 13.8). Inositol-trisphosphate binds to
receptors on intracellular organelles causing the release of Ca2+. Among several other things, increased Ca2+ along with
diacylglycerol lead to the activation of protein kinase C which produces a variety of alterations in the enzymatic machinery of the
cell including the regulation of ion channels that affect the electrical properties of the neuron.
The GABA receptor, like the glutamate GPCR, produces its effects not by directly opening ion channels, but by coupling to G-
B
proteins and enzymes that influence metabolites within the neuron. Reported effects include alterations (either increases or
decreases) in cAMP levels, increases in K+-conductance, and decreases in Ca2+-conductance. Some of the ion channel effects
detected are due to the components of the activated G-protein binding directly to ion channels, influencing their properties (See
Figure 6.5).
13.16 Termination of Action
Two basic mechanisms, diffusion and high affinity uptake, terminate the response to amino acid transmitters. The high affinity
uptake mechanism is the most predominant. The proteins involved in transmitter uptake are related and each contains 12
membrane-spanning domains. Transporters use energy derived either from the hydrolysis of ATP or electrochemical ion gradients
established across the membrane to pump the transmitters into neurons and glia. The energy-dependent nature of these receptors
means that in times of metabolic stress, such as during an ischemic episode, the pumps fail and toxic levels of these transmitters
build up.
13.17 Clinical Manifestations of Altered Glutamate Levels
The neurotransmitter glutamate is highly toxic to neurons when present for extended periods. One of the best understood clinical
conditions involving glutamate is neuronal injury following stroke or trauma. Both events produce massive release of glutamate in
the brain that over-stimulates glutamate receptors. The absence of energy prevents the pumps from removing glutamate from the
synapse. As a consequence, the uncontrolled opening of glutamate receptors causes a large influx of Na+ followed by water that
produces swelling and a large and sustained influx of Ca2+ that leads to hyperactivation of many calcium-dependent enzymes. The
Ca2+ influx through the NMDA receptor appears to be one of the keys to producing neuronal damage since specifically blocking
activation of this receptor attenuates some of the neuronal injury following stroke. The key to minimizing damage following stroke
is well-controlled reestablishment of blood flow so that ATP production is supported and homeostasis is reestablished. Clot breaking
agents such as tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) are now used commonly to reestablish blood flow.
Because glutamate is the major excitatory transmitter in the human brain, derangements in glutamate metabolism or receptor
activation have been implicated in a wide variety of pathologic conditions. These include diseases such as Alzheimer's and
Huntington's chorea.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter13.html 6/8

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Amino Acid Neurotransmitters (Section 1, Chapter 13) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Departm…
13.18 Diseases Associated with GABA
One explanation for the establishment of focal epilepsy is decreased local GABA-mediated inhibition. Many facets of epilepsy can
be elicited experimentally by blocking GABA receptors with the toxin picrotoxin previously described. The decrease in GABA
inhibition permits cells to fire synchronously, thus producing massive local excitation and initiation of a seizure. Clinically, seizures
can often be terminated by inducing a barbiturate coma. High dose barbiturates presumably potentiate GABA's inhibitory effects,
preventing local hyperexcitation by hyperpolarizing the cell membranes.
Mood disorders (generalized anxiety disorder) can also be controlled by drugs which potentiate GABA's inhibitory activity. Some of
the most widely prescribed drugs-benzodiazepines (Librium and Valium)-produce their pharmacological effects by increasing GABA's
ability to hyperpolarize neuronal membranes, thereby quieting the system. This finding suggests that some initial imbalance in the
GABAergic system may underlie aspects of this disorder.
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
Glutamate up-take into glial cells:
A. Is a dead-end pathway
B. Is by passive diffusion
C. Results in its metabolism into glutamine by glutaminase
D. Results in its metabolism into glutamine by glutamine synthase
E. Results in its metabolism into GABA by glutamic acid decarboxylase
Question 2 A B C D E
NMDA receptors:
A. Require membrane depolarization to permit ion flow
B. Require membrane depolarization to permit ion flow and are NOT permeable to Ca2+
C. Are NOT permeable to Na+
D. Bind to G-proteins
E. Have seven-membrane spanning structure consisting of a single subunit
Question 3 A B C D E
GABA and glycine produce inhibitory responses by:
A. Opening ion channels permeable to K+.
B. Opening ion channels permeable to Na+.
C. Opening ion channels permeable to Cl-.
D. Binding to G-protein coupled receptors.
E. Closing ion channels permeable to K+ permeability occur.
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter13.html 7/8

1/7/25, 2:28 AM Amino Acid Neurotransmitters (Section 1, Chapter 13) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Departm…
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s1/chapter13.html 8/8



