1/7/25, 10:05 AM Overview of the Nervous System (Section 2, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depa…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 2: Sensory Systems
Search
Chapter 1: Overview of the Nervous System
Nachum Dafny, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
Reviewed and revised 07 Oct 2020
The human nervous system is divided into the central nervous system (CNS) and the peripheral nervous system (PNS). The CNS, in
turn, is divided into the brain and the spinal cord, which lie in the cranial cavity of the skull and the vertebral canal, respectively.
The CNS and the PNS, acting in concert, integrate sensory information and control motor and cognitive functions.
1.1 The Central Nervous System (CNS)
Figure 1.1
Lateral view of human embryo at the beginning of the 3rd (A) and 5th (B) week of
gestation.
The adult human brain weighs between 1,200 to 1,500 g and contains about one trillion cells. It occupies a volume of about 1400
cc - approximately 2% of the total body weight, and receives 20% of the blood, oxygen, and calories supplied to the body. The
adult spinal cord is approximately 40 to 50 cm long and occupies about 150 cc. The brain and the spinal cord arise in early
development from the neural tube, which expands in the front of the embryo to form the three primary brain divisions: the
prosencephalon (forebrain), mesencephalon (midbrain), and rhombencephalon (hindbrain) (Figure 1.1A). These three vesicles
further differentiate into five subdivisions: telencephalon, diencephalon, mesencephalon, metencephalon, and the myelencephalon
(Figure 1.1B). The mesencephalon, metencephalon, and the myelencephalon comprise the brain stem.
The telencephalon includes the cerebral cortex (cortex is the outer layer of the brain), which represents the highest level of
neuronal organization and function (Figures 1.2A and 1.2B). The cerebral cortex consists of various types of cortices (such as the
olfactory bulbs, Figure 1.2B) as well as closely related subcortical structures such as the caudate nucleus, putamen, globus,
amygdala and the hippocampal formation (Figure 1.2C).
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter01.html 1/13

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Overview of the Nervous System (Section 2, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depa…
Figure 1.2
Lateral (A) and ventral (B) views of the cerebral
cortex. Coronal view (C) of subcortical structures.
The diencephalon consists of a complex collection of nuclei lying symmetrically on either side of the midline. The diencephalon
includes the thalamus, hypothalamus, epithalamus and subthalamus (Figure 1.3).
Figure 1.3
The main diencephalon nuclei.
The mesencephalon (or midbrain) consists of several structures around the cerebral aqueduct such as the periaqueductal gray (or
central gray), the mesencephalic reticular formation, the substantia nigra, the red nucleus (Figure 1.4), the superior and inferior
colliculi, the cerebral peduncles, some cranial nerve nuclei, and the projection of sensory and motor pathways.
Figure 1.4
Subcortical diencephalic and mesencephalic structures.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter01.html 2/13

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Overview of the Nervous System (Section 2, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depa…
Figure 1.5
Lateral view of the metencephalon and a spinal cord
section with ventral and dorsal root fibers, and dorsal
root ganglia.
The metencephalon includes the pons and the cerebellum. The myelencephalon (spinal cord-like) includes the open and closed
medulla, sensory and motor nuclei, projection of sensory and motor pathways, and some cranial nerve nuclei.
The caudal end of the myelencephalon develops into the spinal cord. The spinal cord is an elongated cylindrical structure lying
within the vertebral canal, which includes the central canal and the surrounding gray matter. The gray matter is composed of
neurons and their supporting cells and is enclosed by the white matter that is composed of a dense layer of ascending and
descending nerve fibers. The spinal cord is an essential link between the peripheral nervous system and the brain; it conveys
sensory information originating from different external and internal sites via 31 pairs of spinal nerves (Figure 1.5). These nerves
make synaptic connections in the spinal cord or in the medulla oblongata and ascend to subcortical nuclei.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter01.html 3/13

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Overview of the Nervous System (Section 2, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depa…
Figure 1.6
The central nervous system, which includes the spinal cord and the brain, is the
most protected organ in the human body. It is protected from the external
environment by three barriers: skull, meninges, and cerebral spinal fluid (CSF).
The meninges are composed by three fibrous connective tissues (Figure 1.6). The most external is a dense collagenous connective
tissue envelope known as the dura mater (Latin for “hard mother”). The second, or the intermediated membrane, is a delicate non-
vascular membrane of fine collagenous layer of reticular fibers forming a web-like membrane, known as the arachnoid (Greek for
“spider”). It is separated from the inner pia layer by subarachnoid space, which is filled with cerebrospinal fluid. The inner most
delicate connective tissue membrane of collagenous is the pia mater, a thin translucent elastic membrane adherent to the surface of
the brain and the spinal cord. Blood vessels located on the surface of the brain and the spinal cord are found on top of the pia
matter. The meninges are subject to viral and bacterial infection known as meningitis, a life-threatening condition that requires
immediate medical treatment.
The space between the skull and the dura is known as the epidural space. The space between the dura and the arachnoid is known
as the subdural space. The space between the arachnoid and the pia is known as the subarachnoid space. In this space, there is a
clear liquid known as the CSF. The CSF serves to support the CNS, and to cushion as well as protect it from physical shock and
trauma. The CSF is produced by the choroid plexus, which is composed of a specialized secretory ependymal layer located in the
ventricular system.
The ventricular system is a derivative of the primitive embryonic neural canal. This system is an interconnected series of spaces
within the brain, which contains the CSF (Figure 1.7).
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter01.html 4/13

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Overview of the Nervous System (Section 2, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depa…
Figure 1.7
The ventricular system in four different angles.
In general, the CNS can be divided into three main functional components: the sensory system, the motor system, and
homeostatic and higher brain functions. The sensory system consists of the somatosensory, viscerosensory, auditory, vestibular,
olfactory, gustatory, and visual systems. The motor system consists of motor units, and the somatic (skeletal muscle) system, the
spinal reflexes, the visceral (autonomic) system, the cerebellum, several subcortical and cortical sites, as well as the brain stem
ocular motor control system. The homeostatic and higher functional system includes the hypothalamus, cortical areas involved in
motivation, insight, personality, language, memory, imagination, creativity, thinking, judgment, mental processing, and subcortical
areas involved in learning, thought, consciousness, memory, attention, emotional state, sleep and arousal cycles.
1.2 The Cerebral Hemispheres
The largest and most obvious parts of the human brain are the cerebral hemispheres. The cerebrum has an outer layer - the
cortex, which is composed of neurons and their supporting cells, and in living brain, has a gray color thus called the gray matter.
Under the gray matter is the white matter, which is composed of myelinated ascending and descending nerve fibers, and in living
brain have a white color. Embedded deep within the white matter are aggregates of neurons exhibiting gray color and known as
subcortical nuclei. The cerebral hemispheres are partially separate from each other along the midline by the interhemispheric
fissure (deep groove) the falx cerebri (Figure 1.8A); Posteriorly, there is a transverse fissure that separates the cerebral hemisphere
from the cerebellum, and contains the tentorium cerebellum. The hemispheres are connected by a large C-shaped fiber bundle, the
corpus callosum, which carries information between the two hemispheres.
Figure 1.8
Six cortical lobes: Dorsal view (A), Lateral view (B), Mid-sagittal section showing the
limbic lobe (in green) (C), and Horizontal section showing the insular cortex (D).e
For descriptive purposes each cerebral hemisphere can be divided into six lobes. Four of these lobes are named according to the
overlying bones of the skull as follows: frontal, parietal, occipital and temporal (Figures 1.8A and 1.8B), the fifth one is located
internally to the lateral sulcus – the insular lobes (Figure 1.8B and 1.8D), and the sixth lobe is the limbic lobe (Figure 1.8C) which
contains the limbic system nuclei. Neither the insular lobe nor the limbic lobe is a true lobe. Although the boundaries of the various
lobes are somewhat arbitrary, the cortical areas in each lobe are histologically distinctive.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter01.html 5/13

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Overview of the Nervous System (Section 2, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depa…
The surface of the cerebral cortex is highly convoluted with folds (gyri), separate from each other by elongated grooves (sulci).
These convolutions allow for the expansion of the cortical surface area without increasing the size of the brain. On the lateral
surface of the cerebral hemisphere there are two major deep grooves-sulci (or fissure), the lateral fissure (of Sylvian) and the
central sulci (of Rolando), these sulci provide landmarks for topographical orientation (Figure 1.9A). The central sulcus separates
the frontal lobe from the parietal lobe and runs from the superior margin of the hemisphere near its midpoint obliquely downward
and forward until it nearly meets the lateral fissure (Figures 1.8A and 1.8B). The lateral fissure, separating the frontal and parietal
lobes from the temporal lobe, begins inferiorly in the basal surface of the brain and extends laterally posteriorly and upward,
separating the frontal and parietal lobes from the temporal lobe (Figure 1.9A). The frontal lobe is the portion which is rostral to the
central sulcus and above the lateral fissure, and it occupies the anterior one third of the hemispheres (Figures 1.8 and 1.9). The
boundaries of the parietal lobe are not precise, except for its rostral border – the central sulcus. The occipital lobe is the portion
which is caudal to the parietal lobe (Figures 1.8 and 1.9). Along the lateral surface of the hemisphere, an imaginary line connecting
the tip of the parietal-occipital sulcus and the preoccipital notch (Figure 1.9A), separate the parietal lobe from the occipital lobe. On
the medial surface of the hemisphere (Figure 1.9B), parieto-occipital sulcus forms the rostral boundary of the parietal lobe. The
temporal lobe lies ventral to the lateral sulcus, and on its lateral surface, it displays three diagonal oriented convolutions-the
superior, middle, and inferior temporal gyri (Figure 1.9A). The insula lies in the depths of the lateral sulcus. It has a triangular
cortical area with gyri and sulci (Figures 1.8B and 1.8D, and Figure 1.9A). The limbic lobe consists of several cortical and subcortical
areas (Figure 1.9B).
A.
B.
Figure 1.9
Drawing of the different cortices, sulci and gyri (A) and mid-sagittal
drawing emphasizes the limbic lobe (in green) (B).
The cerebral cortex is a functionally organized organ. A functionally organized system is a set of neurons linked together to convey
a specific type(s) of information to accomplish a particular task. It is possible to identify on the cerebral cortex primary sensory
areas, secondary sensory areas, primary motor area, premotor area, supplementary motor area and association areas, which are
devoted to the integration of motor and sensory information, intellectual activity, thinking and comprehension, execution of
language, memory storage and recall.
The frontal lobe is the largest of the brain lobes and is comprised of four gyri, precentral gyrus that parallels the central sulcus,
and three horizontal gyri: the superior, middle, and inferior frontal gyri. The inferior frontal gyrus is comprised of three parts: the
orbital, the triangular and opercular. The term opercular refers to the “lips of the lateral fissure. Finally, the straight gyrus (gyrus
rectus) and the orbital gyri form the base of the frontal lobe (Figure 1.9B). Four general functional areas are in the frontal lobe.
They are the primary motor cortex, where all parts of the body are represented, the premotor and supplementary motor areas. A
region concerned with the motor mechanisms of speech formulation comprised of the opercular and triangular parts of the inferior
frontal gyrus are known as Broca’s speech area, and the remainder of the prefrontal cortex is involved in mental activity,
personality insight, foresight, and reward. The orbital portion of the prefrontal cortex is important in the appropriate switching
between mental sets and the regulation of emotion.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter01.html 6/13

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Overview of the Nervous System (Section 2, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depa…
The parietal lobe is comprised of three gyri: postcentral gyrus, superior and inferior parietal gyri (Figure 1.9A). The postcentral
gyrus is immediately behind the central sulcus which forms its anterior boundary. The postcentral gyrus comprises the primary
somatosensory cortex which is concerned with somatosensory reception, integration and processing sensory information from the
surface of the body and from the viscera, and is important for the formulation of perception. Caudal to the postcentral gyrus is the
inferior parietal gyrus. The intraparietal sulcus separates the posterior parietal gyrus from the inferior parietal gyrus. The inferior
parietal gyrus represents the cortical association area which integrates and processes sensory information from multiple modalities
such as auditory and visual information. The inferior parietal gyrus, which is known as Wernicke's area, is also important for
language and reading skills, whereas the superior parietal gyrus is concerned with body image and spatial orientations.
The temporal lobe is formed by three obliquely oriented gyri: the superior, middle, and inferior temporal gyri (Figure 1.9A).
Inferomedial to the inferior temporal gyrus are the occipitotemporal and the parahippocampal gyri, which are separated by the
collateral sulcus. The upper surface of the superior temporal gyrus, which extends into the lateral fissure, is called the transverse
temporal gyrus (of Heschl) and is the primary auditory cortex. The caudal part of the superior temporal gyrus, which extends up to
the parietal cortex, forms part of Wernicke’s area. Wernicke’s area is concerned, in part, with processing the auditory information
and is important in the comprehension of language. The inferior part of the temporal lobe (i.e., the occipitotemporal gyri) is
involved in visual and cognitive processing. More medially is the parahippocampal gyrus, which is involved in learning and memory.
Portions of the frontal, parietal, and temporal lobes, which are adjacent to the lateral sulcus and overlie the insular cortex, are
known as the operculum. The inferomedial surface of the temporal lobe is made up of the uncus and the parahippocampal gyrus
medially. The inferior surface of the temporal lobe rests on the tentorium cerebelli.
The occipital lobe is the most caudal part of the brain, lies on the tentorium cerebelli (Figure 1.9A) and is comprised of several
irregular lateral gyri. On its medial surface, there is a prominent fissure – the calcarine fissure and parieto-occipital sulcus. The
calcarine fissure (sulcus) and the parieto-occipital sulcus also define a cortical region known as the cuneus. The cuneus sulcus
divides the occipital lobe into the cuneus dorsally and ventrally into the lingual gyrus. The occipital lobe contains the primary and
higher-order visual cortex.
Figure 1.10
The corpus callosum and its different parts.
The insula lobe is located deep inside the lateral fissure and can be seen only when the temporal and the frontal lobes are
separated (Figures 1.8B and 1.8D). The insula is characterized by several long gyri and sulci, the gyri breves and gyri longi. There
is some evidence that the insular cortical areas are involved in nociception and regulation of autonomic function.
The limbic lobe is not a true lobe and is comprised of several cortical regions such as the cingulate and parahippocampal gyri,
some subcortical areas like the hippocampus, amygdala, septum, and other areas with their respective ascending and descending
connections (Figures 1.8C and 1.9B). The limbic lobe is involved in memory and learning, drive related behavior, and emotional
function.
There are subcortical areas in the telencephalon like the basal ganglia and the amygdaloid nucleus complex. The corpus callosum is
a collection of nerve fibers that connect the two hemispheres. The corpus callosum is divided into rostrum (head), body, the most
rostrally part is the genu (knee) with connecting the rostrum and the body, and the splenium at the caudal extremity (Figure 1.10).
The corpus callosum plays an important role in transferring information from one hemisphere to the other.
1.3 The Diencephalon
The second major derivative of the prosencephalon is the diencephalon. The diencephalon is the most rostral structure of the
brain stem; it is embedded in the inferior aspect of the cerebrum. The posterior commissure is the junctional landmark between the
diencephalon and the mesencephalon. Caudally, the diencephalon is continuous with the tegmentum of the midbrain. During
development the diencephalon differentiates into four regions: thalamus, hypothalamus, subthalamus and epithalamus (Figure
1.11) The epithalamus comprises the stria medullaris habenular trigone, pineal gland and the posterior commissure
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter01.html 7/13

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Overview of the Nervous System (Section 2, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depa…
Figure 1.11
Mid-sagittal drawing showing the main structures of the diencephalon and
rhombencephalon.
1.4 The Brain Stem
The brain stem consists of mesencephalon (midbrain), metencephalon, and myelencephalon. The metencephalon and
myelencephalon together compose the rhombencephalon (hindbrain), which divides into pons, and medulla oblongata (Figures 1.11
and 1.12).
Mesencephalon (midbrain) is continuous with the diencephalon rostrally and with the pons caudally. The midbrain is the smallest
part of the brain stem, being about 2 cm in length. It consists of a tectum posteriorly, a tegmentum inferiorly, and a base anteriorly.
The tectum forms the roof of the cerebral aqueduct, which connects the third ventricle with the fourth ventricle and the tegmentum
its floor. The base of the midbrain consists of the cerebral peduncle, which contain nerve fibers descending from the cerebral cortex.
The nuclei of the 3rd (oculomotor), the 4th (trochlear) and part of the 5th (trigeminal) are located in the midbrain tegmentum. The
red nucleus and the substantia nigra, two prominent nuclei, are also found in the midbrain tegmentum. The midbrain tectum is
formed by two pairs of rounded structures: the superior and inferior colliculi. The superior and inferior colliculi (Figure 1.12) are
involved in visual and auditory functions respectively.
Figure 1.12
Mid-sagittal drawing of the brain stem.
Pons is continuous with the midbrain and is composed of two parts, the pontine tegmentum (located internally) and the basilar
pons. At the level of the pons, the cerebral aqueduct has expanded to form the fourth ventricle (Figure 1.12). The cerebellum is
situated posterior to the pons and forms part of the roof (tectum) of the forth ventricle. The pons contains nuclei that receive axons
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter01.html 8/13

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Overview of the Nervous System (Section 2, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depa…
from various cortical areas. Projections from the axons of these pontine neurons form large transverse fiber bundles that traverse
the pons and ascend to the contralateral cerebellum via the middle cerebellar peduncles. Also, within the pons base and tegmentum
are longitudinally ascending and descending fibers. The nuclei of the 5th (trigeminal), 6th (abducens), 7th (facial) and the 8th
(vestibulocochlear) nerves are located in the pons tegmentum.
Medulla Oblongata (myelencephalon is also known as the medulla). The medulla lies between the pons rostrally and the spinal
cord caudally. It is continuous with the spinal cord just above to foramen magnum and the first spinal nerve. The posterior surface
of the medulla forms the caudal half of the fourth ventricle floor and the cerebellum, its roof (Figure 1.12). The base of the medulla
is formed by the pyramidal-descending fibers from the cerebral cortex. The medulla tegmentum contains ascending and descending
fibers and nuclei from the 9th (glossopharyngeal), 10th (vagus), 11th (accessory) and the 12th (hypoglossal) nerves. The
corticospinal fibers (pyramid) are alongside the anterior median fissure, and decussate (cross the midline) to the contralateral side
on their way to the spinal cord. Other prominent structures in the medulla are the inferior olive, and the inferior cerebellar
peduncle. The medulla contains nuclei which regulate respiration, swallowing, sweating, gastric secretion, cardiac, and vasomotor
activity.
The arterial blood supply to the brain is derived from two arterial systems: the carotid system and the vertebrobasilar system. A
series of an anastomotic channels lying at the base of the brain, known as the circle of Willis, permits communication between
these two systems (Figure 1.13).
Figure 1.13
The main arterial blood supplies to the brain.
The arterial blood supply to the spinal cord is derived from two branches of vertebral artery, the anterior and two posterior spinal
arteries which run the length of the spinal cord and form an irregular plexus around it (Figure 1.14).
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter01.html 9/13

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Overview of the Nervous System (Section 2, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depa…
Figure 1.14
The spinal cord arterial blood supply.
1.5 The Peripheral Nervous System (PNS)
Figure 1.15
The peripheral nervous system.
The PNS includes 31 pairs of spinal nerves, 12 pairs of cranial nerves, the autonomic nervous system and the ganglia (groups of
nerve cells outside the CNS) associated with them. Also included in the PNS are the sensory receptor organs. The receptor organs
are scattered in all parts of the body, sense and perceive changes from external and internal organs, then transform this
information to electrical signals, which are carried via an extensive nervous network to the CNS (Figure 1.15). The cranial and
spinal nerves contain nerve fibers that conduct information to-afferent-(Latin for carry toward) and from-efferent (Latin for carry
away) the CNS. Afferent fibers convey sensory information from sensory receptors in the skin, mucous membranes, and internal
organs and from the eye, ear, nose and mouth to the CNS; the efferent fibers convey signals from cortical and subcortical centers
to the spinal cord and from there to the muscle or autonomic ganglia that innervate the visceral organs. The afferent (sensory)
fibers enter the spinal cord via the dorsal (posterior) root, and the efferent (motor) fibers exit the spinal cord via the ventral
(anterior) root. The spinal nerve is formed by the joining of the dorsal and the ventral roots. The cranial nerves leave the skull and
the spinal cord nerves leave the vertebrae through openings in the bone called foramina (Latin for opening).
The PNS is divided into two systems: the visceral system and the somatic system. The visceral system is also known as the
autonomic system. The autonomic nervous system (ANS) is often considered a separate entity; although composed partially in the
PNS and partially in the CNS, it interfaces between the PNS and the CNS. The primary function of the ANS is to regulate and control
unconsciousness functions including visceral, smooth muscle, cardiac muscle, vessels, and glandular function (Figure 1.16). The
ANS can be divided into three subdivisions:
1. The sympathetic (or the thoracolumbar) subdivision associated with neurons located in the spinal gray between the thoracic
and the upper lumbar levels;
2. The parasympathetic (or craniosacral) subdivision is associated with the 3rd, 7th, 9th and the 10th cranial nerves as well as
with the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th sacral nerves;
3. The enteric subdivision is a complex neuronal network within the walls of the gastrointestinal system and contains more
neurons than the spinal cord. The visceral (autonomic) system regulates the internal organs outside the realm of conscious
control. The PNS component of the somatic system includes the sensory receptors and the neurons innervating them and
their nerve fibers entering the spinal cord. The visceral and the somatic nervous system are primarily concerned with their
own functions, but also work in harmony with other aspects of the nervous system.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter01.html 10/13

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Overview of the Nervous System (Section 2, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depa…
Figure 1.16
The autonomic nervous system.
1.6 Orientation to the Central Nervous System
This section illustrates representative sections through the CNS in order to acquaint the reader with prominent structures and help
in the recognition of the level and orientation of the section. It also provides landmarks for locating nuclei and tracts involved in
sensory and motor functions. Directional terms are used in describing the locations of structures in the CNS.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter01.html 11/13

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Overview of the Nervous System (Section 2, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depa…
Figure 1.17
Orientation of the central nervous system of the spinal cord and different brain sections.
Keep in mind that certain terms were developed to describe the nervous system of quadrupeds and may have a slightly different
meaning when applied to bipeds. For example, the ventral surface of the quadruped spinal cord is comparable to the anterior
surface of the biped (Figure 1.18). In the following descriptions, the terms are applied to a standing human. The terms rostral and
anterior refer to a direction towards the face/nose. The terms caudal and posterior refer to a direction towards the buttocks/tail.
The terms inferior and superior generally refer to spatial relationships in a vertical direction (Figure 1.18). A coronal section is
parallel to the vertical plane and a midcoronal section would divide the head into anterior and posterior halves (Figure 1.19). The
sagittal section is also parallel to the vertical plane, but a midsagittal section would divide the head into right and left halves. The
horizontal (axial) section is parallel to the horizontal plane and a mid-horizontal section would divide the head into superior and
inferior halves. Transverse or cross sections of the spinal cord of humans are taken in a plane perpendicular to the vertical (i.e., in
the horizontal plane of the head). Most electromagnetic imaging techniques produce images of the brain in the coronal, horizontal
(axial) and sagittal planes. The representative sections are transverse sections through the spinal cord and brain stem and coronal
sections through the telencephalon and diencephalon (Figure 1.17).
Figure 1.18
Schematic showing the
orientation of the brain in
the skull / cranium.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter01.html 12/13

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Overview of the Nervous System (Section 2, Chapter 1) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Depa…
Figure 1.19
Three planes of brain
section.
Transverse Section through the Spinal Cord. Figure 1.17A illustrates a section taken at the level of the thoracic spinal cord.
The spinal cord neuron (gray matter) form a central core taking a butterfly configuration that is surrounded by nerve fibers (white
matter). In the left and right halves of the spinal cord, the gray matter is organized into a dorsal horn and ventral horn with the
intermediate gray located between them. In the thoracic spinal cord, which is illustrated in this figure, a lateral horn extends
laterally from the intermediate gray (Figure 1.17A). The spinal cord white matter is subdivided into the posterior white column, the
anterior white column and the lateral white column. The anterior white commissure joins the two halves of the spinal cord and is
located ventral to the intermediate gray. The dorsal root fibers enter the spinal cord at the dorsolateral sulcus and the fibers of the
ventral root fibers exit the spinal cord in numerous fine bundles through the ventral funiculus (see Figure 1.5).
Transverse Section through the Medulla. Figure 1.17B is a section taken at the level of the upper medulla. Landmark
structures include the fourth ventricle, hypoglossal nucleus, inferior cerebellar peduncle, inferior olivary complex and the pyramids.
As in the spinal cord section, the fiber tracts, the inferior cerebellar peduncle and pyramids, appear light in this section whereas the
nuclei in the inferior olivary complex appear dark.
Transverse Section through the Pons. Figure 1.17C is a section taken at the level of the mid pons. Landmark structures
include the fourth ventricle, the pons tegmentum, which includes the abducens nuclei; the pons base, which includes the
corticofugal fibers and pontine nuclei; and the middle cerebellar peduncles.
Coronal Section through the Rostral Telencephalon. Figure 1.17D is a section taken at the level of the decussation of the
anterior commissure. Landmark structures include the head of the caudate nucleus, the anterior limb of the internal capsule, the
globus pallidus and putamen (important for controlling motor functions). The anterior commissure, a fiber bundle connecting the
right and left frontal lobes, can be seen decussating (crossing the midline). The corpus callosum forms a thick band of decussating
nerve fibers located above the lateral ventricles. Below the telencephalon afferent nerve fibers from each eye decussate in the optic
chiasm and join uncrossed fibers to form the optic tract.
Coronal Section through the Midbrain-Diencephalon Junction. Figure 1.17E is a section taken at the level of the junction
of the midbrain with the diencephalon. Notice that the plane of section differs from those of the previous sections. At this level, a
landmark structure of the diencephalon is the thalamus, which surrounds the third ventricle. The posterior limb of the internal
capsule separates the thalamus from the surrounding telencephalic structures (i.e., the globus pallidus and putamen). Lateral to the
putamen is the insula while more dorsomedially the corpus callosum overlies the cavities of the lateral ventricles. Below the third
ventricle are the red nucleus, substantia nigra and crus cerebri of the midbrain, which are the continuation of the internal capsule.
Section through the Midbrain. Figure 1.17F is a section that shows the main midbrain nuclei which include the tectum
(superior colliculi) the periaqueductal gray, the red nuclei, substantia nigra and the cerebral peduncles.
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter01.html 13/13



1/7/25, 10:04 AM Pain Tracts and Sources (Section 2, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department o…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 2: Sensory Systems
Search
Chapter 7: Pain Tracts and Sources
Nachum Dafny, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
Reviewed and revised 07 Oct 2020
Sensitivity and reactivity to noxious stimuli are essential to the well-being and survival of an organism. Without these attributes,
the organism has no means to prevent or minimize tissue injury. Given the importance of pain sensation, it is not surprising that
the central and peripheral neuronal pathways that subserve the transmission of nociceptive information and the pathway that
transmits and modulates this somatosensory transmission are essential to understanding this somatosensory modality. Pain travels
through “redundant” pathways, ensuring to inform the subject to "Get out of this situation immediately."
7.1 Pain Pathways
The ascending pathways that mediate pain consist of three different tracts: the neospinothalamic tract, the paleospinothalamic tract
and the archispinothalamic tract. The first-order neurons are located in the dorsal root ganglion (DRG) for all three pathways. Each
pain tract originates in different spinal cord regions and ascends to terminate in different areas in the CNS.
Neospinothalamic Tract
The neospinothalamic tract has few synapses and constitutes the classical lateral spinothalamic tract (LST) (Figure 7.1). The
first-order nociceptive neurons (in the DRG) make synaptic connections in Rexed layer I neurons (marginal zone). Axons from layer
I neurons decussate in the anterior white commissure, at approximately the same level they enter the cord, and ascend in the
contralateral anterolateral quadrant. Most of the pain fibers from the lower extremity and the body below the neck terminate in the
ventroposterolateral (VPL) nucleus and ventroposteroinferior (VPI) nucleus of the thalamus, which serves as a relay station that
sends the signals to the primary cortex. The VPL is thought to mainly be concerned with discriminatory functions. The VPL sends
axons to the primary somatosensory cortex (SCI).
Content on this
page requires a
newer version
of Adobe Flash
Player.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter07.html 1/12

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Pain Tracts and Sources (Section 2, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department o…
Figure 7.1
The neospinothalamic pathways.
The first-order nociceptive neurons from the head, face and intraoral structures have somata in the trigeminal ganglion (Figure
7.2). Trigeminal fibers enter the pons, descend to the medulla and make synaptic connections in the spinal trigeminal nucleus,
cross the midline and ascend as trigeminothalamic tract (or trigeminal lemniscus, Figure 7.2). The A delta fibers terminate in the
ventroposteromedial (VPM) thalamus, and the C fibers terminate in the parafasciculus (PF) and centromedian (CM) thalamus (PF-
CM complex). The PF-CM complex is located within the intralaminar thalamus and are known also as intralaminar (IL) nuclei. All of
the neospinothalamic fibers terminating in VPL and VPM are somatotopically oriented and from there send axons that synapse on
the primary somatosensory cortex (SC I - Brodman areas 1 & 2). This pathway is responsible for the immediate awareness of a
painful sensation and for awareness of the exact location of the painful stimulus.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter07.html 2/12

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Pain Tracts and Sources (Section 2, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department o…
Figure 7.2
The sensory and spinal trigeminal tracts. The solid blue line represents the
spinothalamic tract. The interrupted blue line represents the spinal trigeminal
tract. The purple line represents the sensory trigeminal tract.
Paleospinothalamic Pathway
The paleospinothalamic tract is phylogenetically old. The majority of the first-order nociceptive neurons make synaptic
connections in Rexed layer II (substantia gelatinosa) and the second-order neurons make synaptic connections in laminae IV-VIII.
The second-order neurons also receive input from mechanoreceptors and thermoreceptors. The nerve cells that furnish the
paleospinothalamic tract are multireceptive or wide dynamic range nociceptors. Most of their axons cross and ascend in the spinal
cord primarily in the anterior region and thus called the anterior spinal thalamic tract (AST). These fibers contain several tracts.
Each of them makes a synaptic connection in different locations: 1) in the mesencephalic reticular formation (MFR) and in the
periaqueductal gray (PAG), and they are also called spinoreticular tract; 2) in the tectum, and these fibers are known as the
spinotectal or spinomedullary tract; 3) in the PF-CM complex (IL) and they are known as the spinothalamic tract (Figure 7.3). The
above three fiber tracts are known also as the paleospinothalamic tract. The innervation of these three tracts is bilateral because
some of the ascending fibers do not cross to the opposite side of the cord. From the PF and CM complex, these fibers synapse
bilaterally in the somatosensory cortex (SC II-Brodman area 3). The paleospinothalamic pathway also activates brain stem nuclei
which are the origin of descending pain suppression pathway regulating noxious input at the spinal cord level (see next chapter).
Content on this
page requires a
newer version
of Adobe Flash
Player.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter07.html 3/12

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Pain Tracts and Sources (Section 2, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department o…
Figure 7.3
The paleospinothalamic pathway.
The multisynaptic tracts which course via the reticular formation also project to the PF-CM (IL) complex. There are extensive
connections between the IL and the limbic areas such as the cingulate gyrus and the insular cortex, which is thought to be involved
in processing the emotional components of pain. That is to say, the insular cortex integrates the sensory input with the cortical
cognitive components to elicit the response to the sensation. The limbic structures, in turn, project to the hypothalamus and initiate
visceral responses to pain. The intralaminar nuclei also projects to the frontal cortex, which in turn projects to the limbic structures
where the emotional response to pain is mediated.
Archispinothalamic Pathway
The archispinothalamic tract is a multisynaptic diffuse tract or pathway and is phylogenetically the oldest tract that carries
noxious information. The first-order nociceptive neurons make synaptic connections in Rexed layer II (substantia gelatinosa) and
ascend to laminae IV to VII. From lamina IV to VII, fibers ascend and descend in the spinal cord via the multisynaptic propriospinal
pathway (Figure 7.4) surrounding the grey matter to synapse with cells in the MRF-PAG area. Further multisynaptic diffuse
pathways ascend to the intralaminar (IL) areas of the thalamus (i.e., PF-CM complex) and also send collaterals to the hypothalamus
and to the limbic system nuclei. These fibers mediate visceral, emotional and autonomic reactions to pain.
Content on this
page requires a
newer version
of Adobe Flash
Player.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter07.html 4/12

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Pain Tracts and Sources (Section 2, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department o…
Figure 7.4
The archispinothalamic pathway.
Figure 7.5 summarizes the three major spinal thalamic pathways. Information about bodily events is conveyed by primary sensory
fibers to higher brain centers through the dorsal column medial lemniscal pathways. This route is considered a "touch pathway,"
separate from the spinal thalamic pathways. However, recent reports indicate that the dorsal column can also carry noxious
information from the viscera and widespread skin regions.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter07.html 5/12

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Pain Tracts and Sources (Section 2, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department o…
Figure 7.5
Summary of the three pathways carrying pain sensation.
7.2 Sources of Pain
Somatic Pain
Somatic pain can be classified as either: 1) cutaneous, superficial or peripheral pain and 2) deep pain.
1. Cutaneous, Superficial or Peripheral Pain. Pain that arises from the skin and muscles or peripheral nerves themselves. In
general, this pain has two components, the initial response (a) followed by later response (b). These signals are transmitted
via different pathway.
A. Pricking pain reaches the CNS via neospinothalamic tract (i.e., LST) to the VPL (or VPM) and to the SCI.
B. Burning and soreness pain resulting from tissue damage reaches the CNS via the paleospinothalamic tract (AST) and
archispinothalamic tract to brain stem nuclei and to PF-CM complex, etc.
2. Deep pain. This pain arises from joint receptors tendons and fascia (i.e., deep structures). The quality of deep pain is dull,
aching or burning. Deep pain is accompanied by a definite autonomic response associated with sweating and nausea, changes
in blood pressure and heart rate. Somatic deep pain reaches the CNS mainly via the paleospinothalamic (Figure 7.3) and
archispinothalamic tract (Figure 7.4).
Reaction to Somatic Pain. Sudden, unexpected damage to the skin is followed by three responses:
A. Startle response. This is a complex psychosomatic response to a sudden unexpected stimulus which includes: A flexion
reflex, postural readjustment and orientation of the head and eyes to examine the damaged area.
B. Autonomic response. This response includes: NE and E release, ACTH and/or cortisol release, and vasoconstriction and
piloerection.
C. Behavioral response. This response includes: Vocalization, rubbing designed to diminish pain, learning to respond to sudden
pain and psychosomatic pain.
Visceral Pain
In the visceral organs, nociceptors respond to mechanical stimulation such as pressure, tissue damage, and chemical stimulation.
Most noxious information carried by visceral afferents does not give rise to conscious sensation. Visceral pain is diffuse, less
precisely graded and typically accompanied by slowing of the heart, lowered blood pressure, cold sweats and nausea. It conveys
also hunger, thirst, electrolyte balance, irregulation in the respiratory and circulatory systems. Many of these signals reach the CNS
bilaterally (Figure 7.6) by the following three channels:
Content on this
page requires a
newer version
of Adobe Flash
Player.
In the visceral organs, free nerve endings are scattered, and any stimulus that excites these nerve endings causes visceral pain
(Figure 7.6). Such stimuli include spasm of the smooth muscle in a hollow viscus, or distention or stretching of the ligament, such
as a stone blocking the ureter or the gall ducts. Stretching of the tissues such as intestinal obstruction can also provoke visceral
pain. Visceral pain is also caused by chemical means as a result of gastrointestinal lesions, and tumors as well as thrombosis of an
artery. In many cases, visceral pain is not localized to the site of its cause, rather in a distant site.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter07.html 6/12

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Pain Tracts and Sources (Section 2, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department o…
Figure 7.6
Neural pathways carrying pain information from visceral organs.
Thalamic Pain
Stroke or occlusion in the thalamogeniculate artery (a branch of the posterior cerebral artery), which supplies the lateroposterior
half of the thalamus, can result in a thalamic lesion, which is often accompanied by neurologic conditions several months after the
initial event. The condition is associated with a devastating intracranial pain in the contralateral side of the thalamic lesion and
sensory loss. In some cases, severe facial pain is experienced without any sensory loss. The pain resulting from an intracranial
lesion is also termed "central pain."
Lesions in the spinothalamic tract and its targets of termination as well as local manifestations of diencephalic lesions are usually
complex. They can induce alteration of sensory, motor and endocrine components because of the functional diversity of the
thalamus. Subjects with this syndrome experience spontaneous aching and burning pain in body regions where sensory stimuli
normally do not lead to pain. Because the brain and the spinal cord do not contain nociceptors, the pathological process presumably
directly stimulates nociceptive pathways, or it prevents the activation of the pain suppression pathways. This condition is known
also as thalamic pain syndrome or Dejerive-Roussy syndrome.
Neuropathic Pain
Neuropathic pain is a sharp, shooting and devastating pain. It is a persistent pain that arises from functional changes occurring in
the CNS secondary to peripheral nerve injury. Once the nerve is damaged, the damaged nerve elicits sustained activation
of nociceptors and/or nociceptive afferents. The neuropathic pain is due to an abnormal activation of the nociceptive system
without specifically stimulating the nociceptors. Neuroplastic changes occurring in the CNS secondary to the afferent barrage are
believed to culminate in CNS neuronal hyperexcitability. Many scientists suggest that “sensitization” of the nervous system following
injury is a factor in neuropathic pain. Neuropathic pain can usually be controlled by anti-inflammatory drugs and opioids. In some
cases, such as in diabetics, AIDS, cancer, etc., no treatment or relief is available to neuropathic pain. Neuropathic pain should not
be confused with neurogenic pain, a term used to describe pain resulting from injury to a peripheral nerve but without necessarily
implying any neuropathy.
Psychosomatic Pain
Psychic reaction to pain includes all the well-known responses to pain such as anguish, anxiety, crying, depression, nausea and
excess muscular excitability through the body. These reactions vary tremendously from one person to another following a
comparable degree of pain stimuli. The sensation of pain can be influenced by emotions, past experiences and suggestions. The
same stimulus can elicit different responses in different subjects under the same conditions.
Recently, Positron Emission Tomography (PET) has been used to study pain pathways and psychosomatic pain centers. For example,
volunteers had their hands dipped in hot water (50° C) while they were conscious. They then dipped their hand again in hot water
(50° C) after a post-hypnotic suggestion that the pain would be either more or less unpleasant than the first time. The PET scans of
their brains showed that activity in the anterior cingulate cortex changed in accordance with how unpleasant they expected the pain
to be. However, the intensity in the primary somatosensory cortex remained constant (i.e., the emotional component of pain is
independent of its sensation).
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter07.html 7/12

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Pain Tracts and Sources (Section 2, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department o…
Referred Pain
Referred pain is a painful sensation at a site other than the injured one. The pain is not localized to the site of its cause (visceral
organ) but instead is localized to a distant site. One possible exception is that the axons carry pain information from the viscera
enter into the spinal cord by the same route as the cutaneous pain sensation axons. Within the spinal cord there is a convergence
of the information on the same nocineurons. This convergence gives rise to the phenomenon of referred pain. For example, pain
associated with angina pectoris, or myocardial infarction is referred to the left chest, left shoulder, and upper left arm (Figure 7.7).
Pain resulting from distention of the colon is referred to the periumbilical area (Figures 7.8).
Figure 7.7
Cardiac pain is
referred to the left
hand. The left hand
and the heart are
developed from the
same myotome and
innervated by the
same nerve.
Figure 7.8
Area of referred pain
(i.e., pain originating
from the gall bladder
is referred to the
right chest and
back).
The following are some hypothesis to explain referred pain
1. Common dermatome hypothesis. When pain is referred, it is usually to a structure that developed from the same embryonic
segment or dermatome as the structure in which the pain originates. Radiating pain down the left arm is the result of a
myocardial infarction (Figure 7.7), or pain originating from the shoulder (dermatomes 3-5).
2. Convergence and facilitation theories (Figure 7.9). Inputs from visceral and skin receptors converge on the same spinal cord
neuron (i.e., viscerosomatic neurons). Therefore, visceral pain is referred to skin area because the nociceptors' terminals from
the viscera terminate in the spinal cord on the same neurons that receive input from the skin.
Figure 7.9
Convergence in referred pain is carried via the paleospinothalamic tract.
3. Facilitation or irritable focus. Pain impulses from the viscera alone are unable to pass directly from spinal cord neurons to the
brain, but create an "irritable focus". When visceral and skin impulses arrive together, the information transmitted to higher
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter07.html 8/12

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Pain Tracts and Sources (Section 2, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department o…
centers and the brain interprets the pain as being from the skin (Figure 7.10).
Figure 7.10
Convergence of referred pain.
4. Learned phenomenon. Visceral information arrives in the CNS. However, the brain interprets that the impulses originate from
the site of a previous surgical operation, trauma or localized pathologic process.
Phantom (illusory) Pain
Phantom or illusory pain is the experience of pain without any signals from nociceptors. It occurs in a subject with previous
injuries such as amputation in which the dorsal roots are literally absent from the cord. Even though no sensory signals can enter
the cord, the subject often feels extreme pain in the denervated parts of the body. For example, an amputee will often apparently
feel pain in a part of his body that has been removed. The phenomenon of phantom limb pain is a common experience after a limb
has been amputated or its sensory roots have been destroyed in which the pain is felt in a part of the body that no longer exists.
Pain from an amputated arm is referred to the viscera as a result of disruption to the “balance” between different peripheral inputs
to the dorsal horn. A complete break of the spinal cord also often leads to a phantom body pain below the level of the break. The
source of phantom pain is complex and not well understood. It has been suggested that there may be abnormal discharges 1) from
the remaining cut ends of nerves which grow into nodules called neuromas, 2) from overactive spinal neurons, 3) from abnormal
flow of signals through the somatosensory cortex, or 4) from burst-firing neurons in the thalamus.
7.3 Acute Pain
Acute pain arises from activation of nociceptors for a limited time and is not associated with significant tissue damage (e.g., a pin
prick).
7.4 Chronic Pain
Chronic pain is prolonged pain lasting for months or longer that arises from tissue injury, inflammation, nerve damage, tumor
growth, lesion or occlusion of blood vessels. Chronic or inflammatory pain can sensitize (see "Sensitization" below) the nervous
system, evoking chemical, functional, and even structural changes that serve to “prime the pain-processing pump”. Chronic pain,
such as lower back pain, rheumatoid and osteoarthritis, and headache (see "Headaches" below) may result from constant
inflammatory activity which activates G proteins. In some cases, the pain persists long after the injury heals, but there is no
treatment that will eliminate the pain.
Sensitization
One possible explanation for chronic pain is a phenomenon called sensitization. Following continuation and prolong noxious
stimulation, nearby silent nociceptive neurons that previously were unresponsive to stimulation, now become responsive. In
addition, some of the chemicals produced and released at the injured site also alter the physiological properties of nociceptors. The
nociceptors begin to initiate pain signals spontaneously, which cause chronic pain. In addition, weak stimuli, such as a light touch
that previously had no effect on these nociceptors, will further activate the nociceptors which result in severe pain signals. This
phenomenon is referred to as “peripheral sensitization.” The outcome of peripheral sensitization results in a greater and more
persistent barrage of nerve impulses firing in the CNS. The persistent barrage of nerve impulses results in long-term changes in
nerve cell activity at the level of the spinal cord and higher centers in the brain. This phenomena is referred to as “central
sensitization”. It appears that peripheral and central sensitization persists after the injury apparently has healed. The sensitization
of nociceptive neurons after injury results from the release of different chemicals from the damaged area. It is known that
substance P and calcitonin gene-related peptides are released from peripheral nerve ending which stimulate most cells to release
algesic substances which further potentiates the pain from the injury. In contrast, central sensitization resulting from severe and
persistent injury which cause prolonged release of glutamate on nociceptive dorsal horn cells, this constant glutamate release via G
protein dependent phosphorylation cascades results in opening of postsynaptic ion channels gated by the NMDA receptors. This
phenomenon is also termed "wind up." This activation produces hyperexcitability of the dorsal horn cells and causes "central
sensitization." Pain experts now agree that treating chronic pain early and aggressively yields the best results and prevents patients
from developing physical and psychological conditions that could worsen the pain.
Fibromyalgia
Fibromyalgia is characterized by widespread chronic pain throughout the body, including fatigue, anxiety and depression. It is now
believed that it has a genetic component which tends to run in families.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter07.html 9/12

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Pain Tracts and Sources (Section 2, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department o…
Headaches
A headache is a poorly understood type of pain that can be either acute or chronic. There are about 300 different types and causes
of headaches. The following are some categories of disorders associated with headaches:
Intracranial structural disease
Infectious disease
Cerebrovascular ischemia
Cerebral vein thrombosis
Metabolic disease
Toxic exposures
Medications
Extracranial pressure disorders
Sinusitis
Vasculitis and collagen vascular disease
Hemorrhage (parenchymal and subarachnoid)
Trauma
Withdrawal syndromes
Severe hypertension
Dental, cranial vault, TMJ, and myofascial disorders
Cervical spine and occipitocervical junction disorders
7.5 Summary
Because of the importance of warning signals of dangerous circumstances, several nociception pathways are involved to
transmitting these signals and some of them are redundant.
The neospinothalamic tract conducts fast pain (via A delta fibers) and provides information of the exact location of the noxious
stimulus, and the multisynaptic paleospinothalamic and archispinothalamic tracts conduct slow pain (via C fibers), a pain which is
poorly localized in nature. (Figure 7.5)
Pain activates many brain areas, which link sensation, perception, emotion, memory and motor reaction. Therefore, many pain
clinics target their treatments to block the perception of pain using psychosomatic means of treatments such as biofeedback,
hypnosis, physical therapy, electrical stimulation, and acupuncture-multimodal treatment.
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
Mr. John Thomas experiences visceral pain around the upper left lung. All of the following carry this
nociceptive information EXCEPT the:
A. somatic nerves
B. paleospinothalamic tract
C. sympathetic nerves
D. neospinothalamic tract
E. archispinothalamic tract
Question 2 A B C D E
A surgeon attempting to treat chronic pain from the pelvic region will suggest to make a lesion in the:
A. somatosensory cortex
B. ventroposterior medial thalamus
C. anterior white commissure
D. dorsal column
E. anterior lateral funiculus
Question 3 A B C D E
In Brown-Sequard syndrome:
A. Tactile and pain sensation are lost contralaterally at different levels below the lesion.
B. Thermal sensation is lost in the ipsilateral side above the lesion.
C. Kinesthetic and tactile senses are lost ipsilaterally below the lesion.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter07.html 10/12

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Pain Tracts and Sources (Section 2, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department o…
D. The withdrawal reflex is lost.
E. Atrophy is developed in the muscles below the lesion.
Question 4 A B C D E
Sharp localized pain is transmitted by:
A. archispinothalamic tract
B. Paleospinothalamic tract
C. Neospinothalamic tract
D. Sympathetic nerves
E. Parasympathetic nerves
Question 5 A B C D E
Select the best answer: Pain impulses arising within the abdominal and thoracic cavities may reach
the CNS by:
A. somatic nerves innervating
B. sympathetic nerves
C. parasympathetic nerves
D. none of the above
E. all of the above
Question 6 A B
At the level of the ventral trigeminothalamic tract, pain fibers are generally crossed or uncrossed?
A. Crossed
B. Uncrossed
Question 7 A B C D E
Cell bodies of first order pelvic visceral pain fibers are found in:
A. dorsal root ganglion
B. mesentric ganglion
C. superior cervical ganglia
D. inferior cervical ganglion
E. middle cervical ganglion
Question 8 A B C D E
The following pathway is sectioned in a chordotomy for the treatment of pain:
A. Lateral spinothalamic tract
B. Ipsilateral dorsal column
C. Corticospinal tract
D. Spinocerebellar pathway
E. Spino-olivary tract
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter07.html 11/12

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Pain Tracts and Sources (Section 2, Chapter 7) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department o…
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter07.html 12/12



1/7/25, 10:04 AM Pain Principles (Section 2, Chapter 6) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobi…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 2: Sensory Systems
Search
Chapter 6: Pain Principles
Nachum Dafny, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
Reviewed and revised 07 Oct 2020
Figure 6.1
Three pathways carrying pain sensation from the periphery to the central nervous system.
Most of the sensory and somatosensory modalities are primarily informative, whereas pain is a protective modality. Pain differs
from the classical senses (hearing, smell, taste, touch, and vision) because it is both a discriminative sensation and a graded
emotional experience associated with actual or potential tissue damage.
Pain is a submodality of somatic sensation. The word "pain" is used to describe a wide range of unpleasant sensory and emotional
experiences associated with actual or potential tissue damage. Nature has made sure that pain is a signal we cannot ignore. Pain
information is transmitted to the CNS via three major pathways (Figure 6.1).
Most ailments of the body cause pain. The ability to diagnose different diseases depends to a great extent on the knowledge of the
different qualities and causes of pain. Sensitivity and reactivity to noxious stimuli are essential to the well-being and survival of an
organism. Pain travels through redundant pathways, ensuring to inform the subject: “Get out of this situation immediately.” Without
these attributes, the organism has no means to prevent or minimize tissue injury. Individuals congenitally insensitive to pain are
easily injured and most of them die at an early age.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter06.html 1/10

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Pain Principles (Section 2, Chapter 6) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobi…
For thousands of years, physicians have tried to treat pain without knowing the details of the ways in which pain is signaled from
the injured part of the body to the brain, or the ways in which any of their remedies worked. Recent discoveries about how the
body detects, transmits and reacts to painful stimuli, have allowed physicians to relieve both acute and chronic pain.
6.1 Pain Receptors
Pain is termed nociceptive (nocer – to injure or to hurt in Latin), and nociceptive means sensitive to noxious stimuli. Noxious stimuli
are stimuli that elicit tissue damage and activate nociceptors.
Nociceptors are sensory receptors that detect signals from damaged tissue or the threat of damage and indirectly also respond to
chemicals released from the damaged tissue. Nociceptors are free (bare) nerve endings found in the skin (Figure 6.2), muscle,
joints, bone and viscera. Recently, it was found that nerve endings contain transient receptor potential (TRP) channels that sense
and detect damage. The TRP channels are similar to voltage-gated potassium channels or nucleotide-gated channels, having 6
transmembrane domains with a pore between domains 5 and 6. They transduce a variety of noxious stimuli into receptor potentials,
which in turn initiate action potential in the pain nerve fibers. This action potential is transmitted to the spinal cord and makes a
synaptic connection in lamina I and/or II. The cell bodies of nociceptors are mainly in the dorsal root and trigeminal ganglia. No
nociceptors are found inside the CNS.
Figure 6.2
Different nociceptors/free nerve endings, and the fibers carrying pain sensation from the nociceptors to the spinal
cord.
Nociceptors are not uniformly sensitive. They fall into several categories, depending on their responses to mechanical, thermal,
and/or chemical stimulation liberated by the damage, tumor, and/or inflammation.
Skin Nociceptors. Skin nociceptors may be divided into four categories based on function. The first type is termed high threshold
mechanonociceptors or specific nociceptors. These nociceptors respond only to intense mechanical stimulation such as pinching,
cutting or stretching. The second type is the thermal nociceptors, which respond to the above stimuli as well as to thermal stimuli.
The third type is chemical nociceptors, which respond only to chemical substances (Figure 6.2). A fourth type is known as
polymodal nociceptors, which respond to high intensity stimuli such as mechanical, thermal and to chemical substances like the
previous three types. A characteristic feature of nociceptors is their tendency to be sensitized by prolonged stimulation, making
them respond to other sensations as well.
Joint Nociceptors. The joint capsules and ligaments contain high-threshold mechanoreceptors, polymodal nociceptors, and
"silent" nociceptors. Many of the fibers innervating these endings in the joint capsule contain neuropeptides, such as substance P
(SP) and calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP). Liberation of such peptides is believed to play a role in the development of
inflammatory arthritis.
Visceral Nociceptors. Visceral organs contain mechanical pressure, temperature, chemical and silent nociceptors. The visceral
nociceptors are scattered, with several millimeters between them, and in some organs, there are several centimeters between each
nociceptor (Figure 6.3). Many of the visceral nociceptors are silent. The noxious information from visceral organs and skin are
carried to the CNS in different pathways (Figures 6.3 and 6.4).
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter06.html 2/10

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Pain Principles (Section 2, Chapter 6) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobi…
Figure 6.3
Visceral nociceptors and the fibers and pathways carrying the noxious information to
the CNS.
Figure 6.4
Silent Nociceptors. In the skin and deep tissues there are additional nociceptors called "silent" or "sleep" nociceptors. These
receptors are normally unresponsive to noxious mechanical stimulation, but become “awakened” (responsive) to mechanical
stimulation during inflammation and after tissue injury. One possible explanation of the "awakening" phenomenon is that
continuous stimulation from the damaged tissue reduces the threshold of these nociceptors and causes them to begin to respond.
This activation of silent nociceptors may contribute to the induction of hyperalgesia, central sensitization, and allodynia (see below).
Many visceral nociceptors are silent nociceptors.
Activation of the nociceptor initiates the process by which pain is experienced, (e.g., we touch a hot stove or sustain a cut). These
receptors relay information to the CNS about the intensity and location of the painful stimulus.
6.2 Factors that Activate Nociceptors
Nociceptors respond when a stimulus causes tissue damage, such as that resulting from cut strong mechanical pressure, extreme
heat, etc. The damage of tissue results in a release of a variety of substances from lysed cells as well as from new substances
synthesized at the site of the injury (Figure 6.5). Some of these substances activate the TRP channels which in turn initiate action
potentials. These substances include:
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter06.html 3/10

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Pain Principles (Section 2, Chapter 6) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobi…
1. Globulin and protein kinases. It has been suggested that damaged tissue releases globulin and protein kinases, which are
believed to be amongst the most active pain-producing substances. Minute subcutaneous injections of globulin induce severe
pain.
2. Arachidonic acid. Arachidonic acid is one of the chemicals released during tissue damage. It is then metabolized into
prostaglandin (and cytokines). The action of the prostaglandins is mediated through a G protein, protein kinase A cascade.
The prostaglandins block the potassium efflux released from nociceptors following damage, which results in additional
depolarization. This makes the nociceptors more sensitive. Aspirin is an effective pain killer because it blocks the conversion
of arachidonic acid to prostaglandin.
3. Histamine. Tissue damage stimulates the mast cells to release histamine to the surrounding area. Histamine excites the
nociceptors. Minute subcutaneous injections of histamine elicit pain.
4. Nerve growth factor (NGF). Inflammation or tissue damage triggers the release of NGF. NGF then binds to TrkA receptors
on the surfaces of nociceptors leading to their activation. Minute subcutaneous injections of NGF elicit pain.
5. Substance P (SP) and calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) are released by injury. Inflammation of tissue damage
also results in SP and CGRP release, which excites nociceptors. Minute subcutaneous injection of substance P and CGRP elicits
pain. Both peptides produce vasodilation, which results in the spread of edema around the initial damage.
6. Potassium - K+. Most tissue damage results in an increase in extracellular K+. There is a good correlation between pain
intensity and local K+ concentration.
7. Serotonin (5-HT), acetylcholine (ACh), low pH (acidic) solution, and ATP. These substances are released with tissue
damage. Subcutaneous injections of minute qualities of these products excite nociceptors.
8. Muscle spasm and lactic acid. Not only can some headaches result from muscle spasms of smooth muscle, stretching of a
ligament can also elicit pain. When muscles are hyperactive or when blood flow to a muscle is blocked, lactic acid
concentration increases and pain is induced. The greater the rate of tissue metabolism, the more rapidly the pain appears.
Minute subcutaneous injections of lactic acid excite nociceptors.
Figure 6.5
Tissue damage and the variety of the substances released from the injury
site that activate the nociceptors.
The release of these substances sensitizes the nociceptors (C fibers) and reduces their threshold. This effect is referred to as
peripheral sensitization (in contrast to central sensitization that occurs in the dorsal horn).
Figure 6.6
This shows the development of
the flare and the area that
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter06.html 4/10

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Pain Principles (Section 2, Chapter 6) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobi…
becomes hyperalgesic as a
result of injury.
Within 15-30 seconds after injury, an area of several cm around the injured site shows reddening (caused by vasodilation) called a
flare. This response (inflammation) becomes maximal after 5-10 minutes (Figure 6.6), and this region shows a lowered pain
threshold (i.e., hyperalgesia).
Hyperalgesia. Hyperalgesia is an increased painful sensation in response to additional noxious stimuli. One explanation for
hyperalgesia is that the threshold for pain in the area surrounding an inflamed or injured site is lowered. An additional explanation
is that the inflammation activates silent nociceptors and/or the damage elicits ongoing nerve signals (prolong stimulation), which
led to long-term changes and sensitized nociceptors. These changes contribute to an amplification of pain or hyperalgesia, as well
as an increased persistence of the pain. If one pricks normal skin with a sharp probe, it will elicit sharp pain followed by reddened
skin. The reddened skin is an area of hyperalgesia.
Allodynia. Allodynia is pain resulting from a stimulus that does not normally produce pain. For example, light touch to sunburned
skin produces pain because nociceptors in the skin have been sensitized as a result of reducing the threshold of the silent
nociceptors. Another explanation of allodynia is that when peripheral neurons are damaged, structural changes occur and the
damaged neurons reroute and make connection also to sensory receptors (i.e., touch-sensitive fibers reroute and make synaptic
connection into areas of the spinal cord that receive input from nociceptors).
In conclusion, the several kinds of endogenous chemicals are produced with tissue damage and inflammation. These products have
excitatory effects on nociceptors. However, it is not known whether nociceptors respond directly to the noxious stimulus or
indirectly by means of one or more chemical intermediaries released from the traumatized tissue.
6.3 Pain Thresholds and Just Noticeable Differences
Exposing the skin to controlled heat (produced by heating element or laser) makes it possible to measure the threshold for pain.
When the temperature of the skin reaches 45 ± 1°C, subjects report pain. Non-noxious thermal (< 45°C) receptors are innervated
by different types of nerve fibers than those responding to the pain. A temperature of approximately 45ºC denatures tissue protein
and elicits damage in all subjects (Figure 6.7). That is, the pain threshold in all subjects is about the same. However, the response
to pain is different among people.
Figure 6.7
Distribution curve obtained from
experimental testing of the thermal
pain threshold of many male and
female subjects.
Pain is measured by the degree of pain intensity. Different degrees of pain intensity are defined as Just Noticeable Differences
(JND). There are 22 JND for pain elicited by heat to the skin (Figure 6.8A). This discrimination is possible because the discharge
frequency of the nociceptors increases with increasing skin temperature (Figure 6.8B). Thus, nociceptors also supply information on
the stimulus intensity (intensity coding) in addition to the injury location.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter06.html 5/10

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Pain Principles (Section 2, Chapter 6) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobi…
Figure 6.8A Figure 6.8B
Expression of pain intensity in just noticeable differences (JNDs) at different intensities of stimulus (A).
Response of single nocineurons to incremental temperature intensity (B).
6.4 Pain Fibers
The cell bodies of the primary afferent pain neurons from the body, face, and head are located in the dorsal root ganglia (DRG) and
in the trigeminal ganglia respectively. Some of these cell bodies give rise to myelinated axons (A delta fibers), and others give rise
to unmyelinated axons (C fibers). The free nerve endings arise from both A delta fibers and the unmyelinated C fibers, which are
scattered together (Figure 6.9).
Figure 6.9
Conduction of noxious information via A delta and C fibers.
A delta fibers (group III fibers) are 2-5 mm in diameter, myelinated, have a fast conduction velocity (5-40 meters/sec), and carry
information mainly from the nociceptive-mechanical or mechanothermal-specific nociceptors. Their receptive fields are small.
Therefore, they provide precise localization of pain.
C fibers (group IV fibers) are 0.4-1.2 mm in diameter, unmyelinated, have a slow conduction velocity (0.5-2.0 meters/sec), and are
activated by a variety of high-intensity mechanical, chemical and thermal stimulation and carry information from polymodal
nociceptors. C-fibers comprise about 70% of all the fibers carrying noxious input. Two classes of C-fibers have been identified. The
receptive field of these neurons is large and, therefore, less precise for pain localization.
Upon entering the spinal cord, the pain fibers bifurcate and ascend and descend to several segments, forming part of the tract of
Lissauer before synapsing on neurons on Rexed layers I to II. In general, nociceptors responding to noxious stimuli transmit the
information to the CNS via A delta fibers, which make synaptic connections to neurons in Rexed layer I (nucleus posterior
marginalis). The nociceptors responding to chemical or thermal stimuli (i.e., the polymodal nociceptors) carry their activity mainly
by C unmyelinated fibers. One class of C fibers terminates in Rexed layer I, and the second class terminates in Rexed layer II
(substantia gelatinosa). These fibers release substance P, glutamate, aspartate calcitonin gene related peptide (CGRP), vasoactive
intestinal polypeptide (VIP), and nitric oxide.
6.5 Double Pain Sensations
Two sequential pain sensations in short time intervals is the result of sudden painful stimulation. The first one is immediately after
the damage. It is followed several seconds later with additional pain sensation. These two separate sensations are several seconds
apart because a fast transmitting information sensation is carried via A delta fibers and is followed several seconds later with slow
transmitting pain information carried via C fibers. This phenomenon is known as “double pain sensation” (Figure 6.9).
Two experimental procedures were used to verify which information is carried by which fibers.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter06.html 6/10

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Pain Principles (Section 2, Chapter 6) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobi…
1. Externally applied pressure, such as compression of the skin above a nerve, first blocks the myelinated A delta fibers, while C
fibers continue to conduct action potentials and allow the slow conducting pain to be carried.
2. A low dose of local anesthesia applied to peripheral nerves blocks the unmyelinated C fibers before the myelinated A delta
fibers. Under this condition, the slow conducting pain information is blocked, and only the fast conducting pain information by
A delta fibers is carried to the CNS. This experiment provides additional evidence that two different types of nerve fibers carry
noxious information.
6.6 Nociceptive Neurons in the Spinal Cord (Nocineurons)
The synaptic terminals of the axons of the dorsal root ganglion, which carry noxious information arriving to Rexed layers I and II
(Figure 6.10), release neurochemical agents such as substance P (SP), glutamate, aspartate, vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP),
cholecystokinin (CCK), somatostatin, calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), galanin, and other agents. These agents activate the
nocineurons. It was shown that when SP and CGRP are applied locally within the spinal cord dorsal horn, glutamate is released. The
release of glutamate excites the nocineurons. Furthermore, SP receptors (neurokinin receptors) and NMDA receptors (glutamate)
interact which result that the NMDA receptors will become more sensitive to glutamate, which results in central sensitization. The
functions of these peptides are largely unknown but they presumably mediate slow, modulatory synaptic actions in the dorsal horn
neurons. The neuropeptides are always co-localized with other "classical" neurotransmitters.
There are four general types of nocineurons in the spinal cord (Figure 6.10):
1. High threshold mechanoreceptor neurons or nociceptive specific neurons. These neurons are excited only by noxious
cutaneous and/or visceral stimuli. The nociceptive afferent fibers release glutamate and different neuropeptides to activate
the dorsal horn neurons.
2. Chemical nociceptor neurons are excited by chemical or thermal noxious stimulus in the skin or in visceral organs.
3. Thermal nociceptor neurons are excited by chemical or thermal noxious stimulus in the skin or in visceral organs.
4. Polymodal-nociceptive neurons or multi, or wide dynamic range nociceptive neurons. These neurons are excited by both
noxious and non-noxious cutaneous and/or visceral stimuli (polymodal nociceptive neurons). These neurons are activated by a
variety of noxious stimuli (mechanical, thermal, chemical, etc.) and respond incrementally to increasing intensity of the
stimuli.
Figure 6.10
Four different nocineurons in the spinal cord.
Rexed lamina I contains a higher proportion of nociceptive specific neurons, whereas Rexed lamina II contains predominantly multi-
receptive wide dynamic range neurons. The nociceptive-specific neurons alert the subject when a stimulus is noxious, and the
multi-receptive neurons provide the subject with information about the parameters of the noxious stimulus. In general, C fibers
release neuropeptides such as substance P whereas the A delta fibers release glutamate.
6.7 Classification of Pain
Pain has been classified into three major types:
1. Pricking pain. Pain caused by a needle, pin prick, skin cut, etc. - elicits a sharp, pricking quality, stinging pain sensation
carried fast by the A delta fibers. The pain is precisely localized and of short duration. Pricking pain is also called fast pain,
first pain or sensory pain. Pricking pain is present in all individuals and is a useful and necessary component of our sensory
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter06.html 7/10

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Pain Principles (Section 2, Chapter 6) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobi…
repertoire. Without this type of protective pain sensation, everyday life would be difficult. Pricking pain arises mainly from the
skin, and carried mainly by A delta fibers which permits discrimination (i.e., permits the subject to localize the pain).
2. Burning pain or soreness pain. Pain caused by inflammation, burned skin, etc., is carried by the C fibers (slowly conducted
pain nerve fibers). This type of pain is a more diffuse, slower to onset, and longer in duration. It is an annoying pain and
intolerable pain, which is not distinctly localized. Like pricking pain, burning pain arises mainly from the skin. It is carried by
the paleospinothalamic tract. (The old primitive transmission system for diffuse pain which does not permit exact localization.)
3. Aching pain is a sore pain. This pain arises mainly from the viscera and somatic deep structures. Aching pain is not distinctly
localized and is an annoying and intolerable pain. Aching pain is carried by the C fibers from the deep structures to the spinal
cord.
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
All of the following are released in response to noxious stimulation at the damaged site(s) EXCEPT:
A. Globulin
B. Dopamine
C. Arachnoid Acid
D. Acetylcholine
E. Histamine
Question 2 A B C D E
C fibers transmit which type of pain?
A. Pricking pain
B. Stimulation produced analgesia
C. Referred pain
D. Burning pain
E. Sharp pain
Question 3 A B C D E
C fibers are
A. small myelinated fibers which carry sharp pain
B. large unmyelinated fibers which carry burning pain
C. small unmyelinated fibers which carry burning pain
D. large myelinated fibers which carry sharp pain
E. large myelinated fibers which carry temperature sensation
Question 4 A B C D E
Aspirin acts to block the formation of
A. Bradykinins
B. Prostaglandins
C. Histamine
D. Dopamine
E. Serotonin
Question 5 A B C D E
A delta fibers transmit primarily
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter06.html 8/10

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Pain Principles (Section 2, Chapter 6) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobi…
A. burning diffuse pain information
B. pricking localized pain information
C. aching diffuse pain information
D. visceral pain information
E. phantom pain information
Question 6 A B C D E
Pain receptors/nociceptors are
A. bipolar cells
B. free nerve endings
C. epithelial receptors
D. Pacinian corpuscles
E. Meissner corpuscles
Question 7 A B C D E
Double pain sensation results from
A. two different pain receptors
B. two different pathways, differing in the number of the synapses
C. two different fibers which conduct the impulses at different velocities
D. two different neurotransmitters
E. two different neuropeptides
Question 8 A B C D E
A delta fibers transmit which type of pain to VPL?
A. Pricking pain
B. Deep pain
C. Visceral pain
D. Burning pain
E. Aching pain
Question 9 A B C D E
Sharp pain, induced by a skin cut for example, is classified by
A. Burning pain
B. Aching pain
C. Somatic pain
D. Pricking pain
E. Visceral pain
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter06.html 9/10

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Pain Principles (Section 2, Chapter 6) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department of Neurobi…
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter06.html 10/10



1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Processes (Section 2, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 2: Sensory Systems
Search
Chapter 5: Somatosensory Processes
Patrick Dougherty, Ph.D., Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, MD Anderson Cancer Center
(content provided by Chieyeko Tsuchitani, Ph.D.)
Reviewed and revised 07 Oct 2020
Previous chapters described the ways in which the different somatosensory receptors respond to specific types of somatosensory
stimuli and that the receptors, by virtue of their selective sensitivities, extract specific information about the somatosensory
stimulus. The specificity of the receptors forms the basis for a parsing (i.e., a sorting) of somatosensory experience into separate
“information channels” or pathways. For example, sharp-pricking pain is mediated in the neospinothalamic (information channel)
pathway, whereas proprioception is mediated in the medial lemniscus pathway. Recall that the receptor's extraction of
somatosensory information is very specific (e.g., during limb movement, muscle spindles respond to muscle stretch, whereas Golgi
tendon organs respond to muscle contraction) and the processing of this extracted information is kept separate along most of the
ascending pathway. In addition to this parsing of stimulus information, the somatosensory system is also organized to provide a
somatotopic representation of the body surface and parts. The resulting spatial maps provide the anatomical basis for our ability to
localize somatosensory stimuli and for our sense of a 'body image".
As described above, the nervous system reduces somatosensory experience into parallel streams of neural activity - a
decomposition of the experience into stimulus fragments spread over body pieces. So how does one have a sense of "oneness" of
the body and how does one identify an object by handling it? One can do so because somatosensory information converges in the
parietal lobe of the cerebral cortex to provide a cohesive perception of the body and of somatosensory stimuli.
The first part of this chapter will present additional details about the general organization of the somatosensory system and how
somatosensory information is represented and processed in the parietal cortex. This understanding of the general organization of
the somatosensory pathways will be used in the clinical assessments of somatosensory function.
5.1 Sensory Pathways Decussate before Reaching the Thalamus
In each of the somatosensory pathways covered thus far, afferent axons decussate (cross the midline) once on their course to the
thalamus (Figure 5.1).
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter05.html 1/30

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Processes (Section 2, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department…
Figure 5.1
Decussation within the somatosensory pathways. The second-order (2°) axons of the neospinothalamic
pathway (NSTP) decussate in the spinal cord. The 2° axons of the medial lemniscal pathway (MLP),
main sensory trigeminal pathway (MSTP) and spinal trigeminal pathway (STP) decussate at different
levels of the brain stem.
Above the level of decussation, the neurons in a somatosensory pathway represent the contralateral (i.e., opposite) side of the
body or face. It is important to learn the decussation site, as it will aid in clinical diagnosis. When an afferent pathway is damaged
somewhere below the site of decussation, the sensory loss will be on the side ipsilateral to the lesion (i.e., the loss is on the same
side as the lesion or ipsilesional). When an afferent pathway is damaged somewhere above the site of decussation, the sensory
loss will be on the side contralateral to the lesion (i.e., the loss is on the side opposite the lesion or contralesional).
In the medial lemniscal pathway, the axons of the gracile and cuneate nuclei decussate in the medulla. The decussation in the
neospinothalamic pathway is in the spinal cord and involves the axons of the posterior marginal nucleus. The spinal trigeminal
nucleus axons decussate upon leaving the nucleus in the medulla and lower pons, whereas the main sensory trigeminal nucleus
axons decussate at mid pons levels immediately upon leaving the nucleus.
5.2 Modality Specificity is Maintained up to the Cortex
The sensory information necessary for discriminative touch, proprioception, pain and thermal sensations are kept separate within
the somatosensory pathways (Figure 5.2).
Figure 5.2
Modality specificity of the somatosensory pathways. The sensory information used in discriminative
touch and proprioception are processed in separate channels within the medial lemniscal pathway
(MLP) for the body and the main sensory trigeminal pathway (MSTP) for the face. The sensory
information necessary for the perception of sharp pain and cool/cold sensations are processed in
separate channels within the neospinothalamic pathway (NSTP) for the body and the spinal trigeminal
pathway (STP) for the face.
To ensure the fidelity of stimulus representation in the discriminative touch-proprioceptive pathways, there is minimal convergence
of modality specific information along the pathways. That is, within the medial lemniscal and main sensory trigeminal pathways,
there is little mixing of information from different receptor types and from afferents with different adaptive properties up to the
level of the cerebral cortex. For example, a cuneate nucleus neuron (2° medial lemniscal afferent) will synapse only with one type
of posterior root neuron (e.g., 1° afferents with small “touch” receptive fields and rapidly adapting discharges). Within VPL and
VPM, the medial lemniscal and ventral trigeminal lemniscal fibers terminate in different regions based on the sensory information
they are carrying. Fibers carrying cutaneous information terminate within the core of the nucleus, whereas those carrying
proprioceptive information terminate in the surrounding, peripheral shell of the nucleus.
Within the cerebral cortex, there is a convergence of modality specific information and the response properties of cortical neurons
become more complex. The primary somatosensory cortex is responsible for the first stage of cortical processing. Within the
primary sensory cortex, discriminative touch and proprioceptive information from overlapping areas may be combined such that a
cortical neuron may respond to both cutaneous and proprioceptive stimulation of a digit.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter05.html 2/30

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Processes (Section 2, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department…
Figure 5.3
Receptive fields of somatosensory afferents. The receptive
fields of somatosensory 1° afferents are illustrated by the
terminal branches of each afferent (bottom) and by the colored
patches of skin where the terminals form receptors. The
receptive fields are smallest in the digits of the hand (A) and
largest in the torso (C).
5.3 Somatosensory Neurons have Receptive Fields
Each subcortical somatosensory neuron responds to modality-specific stimuli applied to a specific region of the body or face.
For example, an axon in the medial lemniscus (i.e., the fiber tract) that responds to tactile stimulation of the right index finger pad
will not respond to tactile stimulation of any other area in the hand, body or face. The stimulated area producing the response is
called the neuron’s receptive field (Figure 5.3). The neuron’s receptive field can also be defined anatomically as that area of the
sense organ (i.e., skin, muscles or joints) innervated directly or indirectly by the neuron. Consequently, a somatosensory neuron
can be described to channel information about stimulus location - as well as stimulus modality. Furthermore, the size of a neuron’s
receptive field is related to the body area innervated/represented. The receptive fields of neurons innervating/representing the
finger pads, lips, and tongue are the smallest, whereas those of neurons innervating/representing the shoulders, back and legs are
the largest. For greater accuracy in locating the point of stimulus contact or movement, smaller cutaneous receptive fields are
required. For fine motor control, as in playing the piano or speaking, small proprioceptive receptive fields are required.
5.4 Spatial Information is Topographically Mapped in Sensory Pathways
Within each somatosensory structure, neurons are organized to provide a spatial representation of the body and face called the
somatotopic map (Figure 5.4). That is, within the spinal cord, brain stem, thalamus and postcentral gyrus, the location of a neuron
is related to its receptive field. Consequently, body and face (i.e., the receptive fields) are represented spatially (topographically)
within nuclei and cortex such that, neurons with contiguous receptive fields are located adjacent to one another within a given
structure. For example, adjoining areas of the body are represented in adjoining areas of the cortex (Figure 5.4). The resulting
neural maps of the body and face are not isomorphic representations and appear distorted because of the disproportionate
representation of the hand and face areas (Figure 5.4). That is, as the neurons representing the hand and face have small receptive
fields (Figure 5.3), a greater number of neurons are required to represent the hand and face. Because somatosensory neurons
represent specific stimulus features and specific areas of the body or face, electrical stimulation of a restricted area of the
postcentral gyrus (e.g., the area representing the tongue) will produce a somatic (and not gustatory) sensation that is perceived as
arising from the specific region of the body (i.e., the tongue).
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter05.html 3/30

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Processes (Section 2, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department…
Figure 5.4
The somatotopic representation of the body and
face in the postcentral gyrus and posterior
paracentral lobule. The somatotopic map was
developed from reports of the sensation and the
location of the sensation from conscious patients
whose cortices were electrically stimulated during
neurosurgery.
5.5 The Somatosensory Cortex
Somatosensory information converges in the parietal lobe of the cerebral cortex where it is processed to provide a cohesive
perception of your body and your physical environment.
5.6 Primary Cortical Receiving Area
The primary somatosensory cortex, SI, includes the postcentral gyrus and the posterior paracentral lobule of the parietal lobe
(Figure 5.4 & 5.5).
Figure 5.5
Somatosensory cortical areas. The primary somatosensory cortex
(SI) consists of the postcentral gyrus and posterior paracentral
lobule. The secondary cortex (SII) resides in the operculum of the
parietal cortex. The posterior (superior) parietal cortex and part of
the superior temporal gyrus contains the somatosensory
association area.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter05.html 4/30

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Processes (Section 2, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department…
SI extends from the depths of the central sulcus up superiorly to form the posterior lip of the central sulcus. SI is considered the
primary somatosensory cortex because it is the major site of termination of VPL and VPM axons:
its neurons are responsive to somatosensory stimuli almost exclusively;
lesions of SI produce severe somatosensory deficits; and
electrical stimulation of SI produces somatosensory perceptions.
SI is somatotopically organized. The body and face are mapped in the contralateral cortex with the foot and leg represented in
the posterior paracentral lobule and the trunk, chest, arm and hand in the upper half of the postcentral gyrus. The face is
represented in the lower half of the postcentral gyrus (Figure 5.4).
Differential projections to the SI areas arise from the central core and shell of VPM and VPL. However, there is also convergence of
somatotopic and modality specific information in SI. To appreciate the shape, texture, size, weight, and movement of a given
object, the somatosensory cortex must integrate the parallel streams of information carried by the medial lemniscal pathway. To
achieve this integration, the parallel streams converge at cortical levels, starting in SI. As a result of this convergence, receptive
fields become larger, modality specificity diminishes, and the cortical neural responses become more complex.
SI neurons send their axons to the secondary somatosensory cortex, adjacent areas of the parietal lobe, and to cortical motor areas
(Figure 5.6) as well as to subcortical nuclei, brain stem and spinal cord. Unilateral destruction of SI produces severe deficits in all
aspects of discriminative touch and proprioception on the contralesional side of the body. In addition to deficits in the abilities to
accurately localize and to recognize objects by shape, texture and size and to appreciate vibrating/moving stimuli, there are deficits
in fine motor coordination.
Figure 5.6
Diagram of the flow of
information from
mechanoreceptors in the body
and face to various cortical
areas. Information flows
predominantly from the
thalamus to the primary
somatosensory cortex (SI).
From there the information is
forwarded to the secondary
somatosensory cortex (SII),
the primary and supplementary
motor cortex (in the frontal
lobe), and the posterior
parietal cortex. The SII sends
information to the same areas
and also to the insula, which
connects with cortical regions
involved with learning and
memory of somatosensory
information. The superior
temporal polysensory area
integrates somatosensory
information from the posterior
parietal cortex with
information from various other
sensory systems.
5.7 Secondary Cortical Receiving Area
The secondary somatosensory cortex, SII, is located inferiorly - in the pars opercularis of the parietal lobe, which forms part of
upper lip of the lateral sulcus (Figure 5.4 & Figure 5.5). SII neurons send their axons to SI, association cortex, motor cortex, and
insula (Figure 5.6). The latter projection, to the insula, influences structures such as the amygdala and hippocampus. These
structures are important in tactile learning and memory. The projection to the somatosensory association cortex is involved in
higher order processing required for recognizing hand-held objects by texture and size. Consequently, lesions in SII produce deficits
in learning by object manipulation and in recognizing the texture and size of hand-held objects.
5.8 Association Cortical Area
The somatosensory association cortex is located in the superior parietal lobe (a.k.a. posterior parietal cortex), which is posterior to
SI. The highest degree of convergence of somatosensory information occurs in the posterior parietal cortex. The posterior parietal
cortex receives the axons of SI and SII neurons and also receives input from the visual system and other systems involved in
attention and motivation.
Neurons in the posterior parietal cortex are responsive to somatosensory and visual stimuli, have large somatic receptive fields in
which responsiveness is based on stimulus context, and are often more responsive to stimulus movement.
Large lesions involving the posterior parietal cortex and the adjoining superior temporal gyrus may result in an attentional deficit
called “neglect”, wherein there is a partial neglect (inattention) to tactile, proprioceptive and/or visual stimuli delivered contralateral
to the lesion site. The patient is described as ignoring the contralesional half of her/his body and space. The perception of a "whole"
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter05.html 5/30

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Processes (Section 2, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department…
body is lost and the body parts affected may be considered to belong to someone else. Visual stimuli on the contralesional side may
also be ignored.
5.9 Cortical Areas for Pain Sensation
Pain information is processed in multiple pathways (see Table 1 in the chapter on Somatosensory Systems) involving multiple
thalamic nuclei that project to multiple cortical areas. In addition to the somatosensory cortex, painful stimuli activate neurons in
the rostral cingulate gyrus and the insula. Consequently, all pain sensation is not lost when the primary somatosensory cortex is
damaged. Primary somatosensory cortex neurons that have small receptive fields and are selectively responsive to sharp, cutting
painful stimuli are considered to provide the ability to accurately localize the exact point of contact with the painful stimulus.
Lesions of the primary somatosensory cortex will affect the quality of pain sensations and the ability to localize the exact location of
the painful stimulus.
5.10 Clinical Examples
An excellent way to test your knowledge of the material presented thus far is by examining the effects of damage to structures
within the somatosensory pathways. The observed sensory loss(s) provide clues to the pathway(s) affected; and the area(s) and
side of the body/face affected provide clues to the level of the damage. The following section should help you determine how well
you can utilize what you have learned thus far about the somatosensory system.
Example 1 Example 2 Example 3 Example 4 Example 5 Example 6 Example 7 Example 8
5.11 Peripheral Nervous System
Peripheral Nerve Damage: Damage to peripheral nerves often results in sensory and motor symptoms. The sensory losses would
include all somatosensory sensations if the peripheral nerve contains all the afferent axons supplying the skin, muscles and joints of
a given body part (e.g., the hand or jaw). The motor losses may be severe (i.e., total paralysis) if the peripheral nerve contains all
of the motor axons controlling the muscles of the normally innervated body part.
Example 1
Server
Error
404 -
File or
directory
not
found.
The
resource
you are
looking for
might have
been
Figure 5.7
The patient reports a loss of all sensation from his left hand.
Symptoms: The patient complains of loss of sensation and weakness involving his left hand (Figure 5.7). The physical examination
determines that he is insensitive to pain, touch, vibration and finger position in his left hand. However, touch, vibration, position
and pain sensations are normal in the rest of his body and face.
You conclude that the somatosensory losses in his left hand include
Loss of discriminative touch and proprioception (touch, vibration & position).
Severe decrement in pain sensation (analgesia).
Pathway(s) Affected: You conclude that structures in the following somatosensory pathways (Figure 5.8) may have been affected
the medial lemniscal (touch, vibration & position) pathway
the spinothalamic (pain and temperature) pathway
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter05.html 6/30

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Processes (Section 2, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department…
Figure 5.8
The medial lemniscal pathway (MLP) and neospinothalamic pathway
(NSTP) carry somatosensory information from the left hand to the
right cortex. Press to view the MLP and NSTP.
Side & Level of Damage: The sensory losses (Figure 5.9)
are limited to the left hand
involve all somatosensory pathways
are associated with motor dysfunction
Figure 5.9
The results of testing somatosensory sensation for Example 1. A pin prick to
the left hand produces no perceived pain sensations; and application of a
vibrating tuning fork on the left hand or manipulating the fingers of the left
hand produce no vibration or proprioceptive sensations. Press THUMB to view
the course of action potentials generated in response to application of a
vibrating tuning fork or a pin prick to the left hand. Vibration and pain
sensations are normal in the rest of the body and face.
Press FOOT to view the course of action potentials generated in response to
application of a vibrating tuning fork or a pin prick to the left foot.
So, you conclude that
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter05.html 7/30

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Processes (Section 2, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department…
damage is to the peripheral nerve(s) innervating the left hand (Figure 5.10)
symptoms are ipsilesional (i.e., on the same (left) side as the damaged nerve)
Figure 5.10
The ulnar and meridian nerves provide sensory innervation to the hand. When these nerves are
severed, the area normally innervated loses all sensations and motor functions.
Damage to peripheral nerves results in a loss of all somatosensory modalities and motor function in a restricted area of the body
defined by the nerve distribution. Electrophysiological methods can be used to determine the nerves involved and the degree of
nerve damage (Refer to the section "Peripheral Somatosensory Axons" in the chapter on Somatosensory Pathways).
Posterior or Cranial Nerve Root Damage: The central processes of the 1° somatosensory afferents collect to form a posterior root
prior to entering the spinal cord. Consequently, the area of the body supplied by a single posterior root is represented by the sum
of receptive fields of the 1° afferents in the root. The area of the body innervated by a posterior root is called a dermatome (Figure
5.11). Posterior root damage would result in somatosensory losses in the dermatome supplied by the root. All sensations would be
lost in the central area of the dermatome. The more peripheral areas of the dermatome will have some sensation, albeit less than
normal, as consecutive roots have partially overlapping dermatomes.
Figure 5.11
The dermatome of each posterior root is illustrated and represented by a root number (e.g. T4 for
the fourth thoracic root). A given dermatome (e.g. T4) represents the collective receptive fields of
all the 1° afferents making up that (e.g. T4) posterior root.
The symptoms produced by cranial nerve root damage depend upon the cranial nerve involved. For example, the trigeminal nerve
root contains somatosensory (major) and chemosensory (minor) 1° afferent axons innervating the face, as well as efferent (motor)
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter05.html 8/30

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Processes (Section 2, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department…
axons controlling the jaw muscles (Refer to Table 2 in the chapter on Somatosensory Pathways for the cranial nerves providing
somatosensory innervation of the face and dura).
Example 1 Example 2 Example 3 Example 4 Example 5 Example 6 Example 7 Example 8
5.12 Clinical Examples:
Peripheral Nervous System (continued)
Example 2
Server
Error
404 -
File or
directory
not
found.
The
resource
you are
looking for
might have
been
Figure 5.12
The patient reports a loss of sensation along the lateral aspect of his left arm that extends down to include the thumb
of his left hand.
Symptoms. The patient complains of a loss of sensation along the side of his left arm that extends down to include the thumb of his
left hand (Figure 5.12). Physical examination determines that there are decreases in the abilities to detect vibration and position
involving the left elbow and thumb and loss of touch and pain sensations along the lateral edge of the left arm down to the thumb.
Touch, vibration, position, and pain sensations are normal for the rest of the body and face.
You conclude that the somatosensory losses in his left arm involve
discriminative touch and proprioception
pain sensation
Pathway(s) Affected: You conclude that structures in the following somatosensory pathways (Figure 5.8) have been affected
the medial lemniscal pathway
the spinothalamic pathway
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter05.html 9/30

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Processes (Section 2, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department…
Server Error
404 - File or directory not found.
The resource you are looking for might have been removed, had its
name changed, or is temporarily unavailable.
Figure 5.13
The results of testing somatosensory sensation for Example 2. A pin prick to the left thumb
produces no perceived pain sensations; and a vibrating tuning fork in contact with the left
arm or manipulating the left arm and thumb produce no vibration or proprioceptive
sensations. Press HAND to view the course of action potentials generated in response to
application of a vibrating tuning fork or a pin prick applied to the left thumb. Vibration and
pain sensations are normal for the rest of the body. Press FOOT to view the course of action
potentials generated in response to application of a vibrating tuning fork or a pin prick
applied the left foot.
Side & Level of Damage: As the sensory losses (Figure 5.13)
are limited to the lateral aspect of the left arm and extended down to include the left thumb
involve both somatosensory pathways
involve a dermatomal pattern
do not involve motor function
You conclude that
damage may involve the fifth, sixth and seventh cervical posterior roots (Figure 5.11)
symptoms are ipsilesional (i.e., involve the left posterior roots, Figure 5.14)
Server Error
404 - File or directory not found.
The resource you are looking for might have been removed, had its
name changed, or is temporarily unavailable.
Figure 5.14
The fifth, sixth and seventh cervical posterior roots provide sensory innervation to the
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter05.html 10/30

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Processes (Section 2, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department…
lateral edge of the arm. Compression of the posterior roots will prevent action potentials
generated by somatic stimulation from reaching the spinal cord
Section of a Posterior Root results in the loss of all somatosensory modalities in a restricted area of the body defined by the root
dermatome (Figure 5.11). Consequently, the damaged posterior root can be identified by the dermatomal pattern of sensory loss.
Radiographic methods can be used to determine if the roots are being compressed by abnormalities in the vertebra.
Example 1 Example 2 Example 3 Example 4 Example 5 Example 6 Example 7 Example 8
5.13 Clinical Examples:
Central Nervous System: The Spinal Cord
Spinal Cord Damage: Although there are numerous tracts in the spinal cord, the tracts considered to be of major clinical importance
are limited. There are three major ascending tracts in the spinal cord, the posterior funiculus (which includes the gracilis and
cuneatus fasciculi, aka posterior columns); the spinothalamic tract (in the anterior and lateral funiculi); and the posterior
spinocerebellar tract (in the lateral funiculus).
Clinical symptoms of spinal cord damage are obvious when the posterior columns and/or spinothalamic tract are affected. The
posterior spinocerebellar tract carries unconscious proprioceptive information and damage to it does not result in sensory
losses.
When a somatosensory tract is sectioned in the spinal cord, the sensory losses start at the level of the lesion and extend
down to encompass lower parts of the body. Such a loss occurs because the flow of ascending afferent information from the
lesion site and lower body is interrupted and cannot reach the thalamus and cerebral cortex.
The spinothalamic tracts are crossed in the spinal cord. The decussation in the medial lemniscal pathway occurs in the lower
medulla.
The cranial nerves, which are associated with the brain stem, supply the motor and sensory innervation of the face.
Consequently, spinal cord lesions do not produce sensory or motor losses involving the face. When somatosensory losses are
isolated to the body, spinal cord lesions should be suspected.
Unilateral lesion of one descending tract, the corticospinal tract in the lateral funiculus, produces the most obvious motor
deficits (i.e., deficits in voluntary motor control below the level of the lesion).
Example 3
Server
Error
404 -
File or
directory
not
found.
The
resource
you are
looking for
might have
been
Figure 5.15
The patient suffers from loss of discriminative touch and proprioception (i.e., vibration and position sensations) from
the right half of the body starting just below the right nipple and extending down to and including his right foot.
Symptoms: The patient complains of problems with walking, especially at night when there is little light. He also reports a loss of
sensation in his right foot. Physical examination determines that there are decreases in vibration and position sensations and poor
localization of tactile stimuli involving the right half of his body starting just below the right nipple and extending down to include
his right foot (Figure 5.15). Pain sensation is normal in the right torso, leg and foot. Touch, vibration, position and pain sensations
are normal for the rest of the body and face. The Romberg test is positive. (i.e., The patient has difficulty standing upright with his
feet together and his eyes closed.)
You conclude that the somatosensory losses in his right lower body involve
discriminative touch and proprioception
Pathway(s) Affected: You conclude that structures in the following somatosensory pathway may have been affected (Figure 5.16)
the medial lemniscal pathway
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter05.html 11/30

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Processes (Section 2, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department…
Figure 5.16
Neurons in the medial lemniscal pathway (MLP) process discriminative
touch and proprioceptive information from the body. The MLP 1° afferents
ascend uncrossed in the spinal cord within the posterior funiculus. In
contrast, the 2° afferents of the neospinothalamic pathway (NSTP), which
carry pain and temperature information, decussate in the spinal cord and
ascend the cord in the lateral funiculus. Consequently, within the spinal
cord, discriminative touch and proprioception of the right side of the body
is represented in the ipsilateral (right) posterior funiculus and pain and
temperature from the right side of the body is represented in the
contralateral (left) lateral funiculi.
Side & Level of Damage: The sensory losses (Figure 5.17)
do not involve the face
involve only the medial lemniscal pathway
start at the nipple and extend to the foot
are limited to the right side of the body
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter05.html 12/30

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Processes (Section 2, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department…
Figure 5.17
The results for testing somatosensory sensations for example 3. Applying a vibrating tuning
fork on the right foot and manipulating right foot produce no vibration or proprioceptive
sensations. However, a pin prick to the right foot produces a well-localized sensation of
sharp pain. Press FOOT to view the course of action potentials generated in response to the
tuning fork on the right foot and pin prick to the right foot. Vibration and pain sensations
are normal in the rest of the body. Press HAND o view the course of action potentials
generated in response to application of a vibrating tuning fork to the right and left hands.
So, you conclude that
damage is limited to the posterior column of the spinal cord as pain sensation is not affected (Figure 5.18)
the fifth thoracic segment of the spinal cord may be involved (Figure 5.11)
symptoms are ipsilesional (i.e., involve damage to the right half of the spinal cord, Figure 5.18)
Figure 5.18
The posterior column has been damaged at upper thoracic level (T5) on the
right side. The afferents pain and temperature sensations from the right and
left side of the body were spared as the lateral and anterior columns were not
damaged.
When only the posterior column of the spinal cord is damaged, there are losses involving discriminative touch and proprioception,
but no loss of pain, temperature or crude touch sensitivity. The deficit is ipsilesional and extends down the body from the level of
the lesion. There is an inability to appreciate vibrating stimuli and the position and movement in the ipsilesional lower body. The
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter05.html 13/30

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Processes (Section 2, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department…
remaining tactile sense in the ipsilesional lower body is poorly localized as the spinothalamic tracts are undamaged. The Romberg
test is positive as the patient has lost proprioception in a leg and cannot maintain normal posture with eyes closed.
Example 1 Example 2 Example 3 Example 4 Example 5 Example 6 Example 7 Example 8
5.14 Clinical Examples:
Central Nervous System: The Spinal Cord (continued)
Example 4
Server
Error
404 -
File or
directory
not
found.
The
resource
you are
looking for
might have
been
Figure 5.19
The patient suffers from loss of pain and temperature sensations from the left half of the body starting just below the
left nipple and extending down to and including his left foot.
Symptoms: The patient presents with a complaint of repeatedly injuring his left foot. Physical examination determines that there
are losses of pain and temperature sensations involving the left half of his body starting just below the left nipple and extending
down to include his left foot (Figure 5.19). However, discriminative touch, and position sensations are normal in the left torso, leg
and foot. Touch, vibration, position, pain, and temperature sensations are normal for the rest of the body and face. The result of
the Romberg test is negative.
You conclude that the somatosensory losses in his left side of his body involve
pain and temperature sensations
Pathway(s) Affected: You conclude that structures in the following somatosensory pathway (Figure 5.20) have been affected
the spinothalamic pathways
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter05.html 14/30

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Processes (Section 2, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department…
Figure 5.20
Neurons of the neospinothalamic pathway (NSTP) process sharp, cutting
pain, and cool/cold information from the body. The 2° afferents of the
neospinothalamic pathway decussate in the spinal cord and ascend the
cord in the lateral funiculus. In contrast, the 1° afferents of the medial
lemniscal pathway (MPL), which carry discriminative touch and
proprioceptive information, ascend uncrossed in the spinal cord within the
posterior funiculus. Consequently, within the spinal cord, sharp pain and
cool/cold from the left side of the body is represented in the contralateral
(right) lateral funiculus, and discriminative touch and proprioception of
the left side of the body is represented in the ipsilateral (left) posterior
funiculus.
Side & Level of Damage: The sensory losses (Figure 5.21)
do not involve the face
involve the spinothalamic pathways
start at the nipple and extend to the foot
are limited to the left side of the body
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter05.html 15/30

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Processes (Section 2, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department…
Figure 5.21
The results of testing somatosensory sensation for Example 4. A pin prick to the left foot
does not produce a well localized sensation of sharp pain. However, a vibrating tuning fork
on the left foot or manipulating the foot produces vibration or proprioceptive sensations,
respectively. Press FOOT to view the course of action potentials generated in response to
the tuning fork on, and a pin prick to, the left foot. Pin pricks to the upper body produce well
localized sensations of sharp pain. Press HAND to view the course of action potentials
generated in response to pin pricks to the left and right hands.
So, you conclude that
damage is in the lateral funiculus (lateral spinothalamic tract) of the spinal cord (Figure 5.22)
the fifth thoracic segment of the spinal cord may be involved (Figure 5.11)
symptoms are contralesional (i.e., the damage is to the right side of the spinal cord)
Figure 5.22
Part of the anterior and lateral funiculi, which contain the spinothalamic tracts,
has been damaged at an upper thoracic level (T5) on the right side. The
discriminative touch and proprioceptive afferents from the left and right side of
the body were spared as the 1° afferents of the medial lemniscal pathway,
which are in the posterior funiculus, were not damaged.
Anterolateral cordotomy has been used to relieve intractable pain. When the cut is limited to section of the spinothalamic tract,
there is a decrease in pain and temperature sensitivity. As the posterior funiculus is not involved in the section, discriminative touch
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter05.html 16/30

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Processes (Section 2, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department…
and proprioception remain intact. The deficit in pain and temperature sensitivity is contralesional and extends down the length of
the body from the site of the lesion. However, pain sensation often returns, albeit in a different form, following the surgical section
of the spinothalamic tract.
Example 1 Example 2 Example 3 Example 4 Example 5 Example 6 Example 7 Example 8
5.15 Clinical Examples:
Central Nervous System: The Spinal Cord (continued)
Example 5
Server
Error
404 -
File or
directory
not
found.
The
resource
you are
looking for
might have
been
Figure 5.23
The patient suffers from loss of pain and temperature sensations from the left half of the body starting just below the
left nipple and extending down to and including his left foot. He also exhibits loss of discriminative touch and
proprioception in a corresponding area on the right side of his body.
Symptoms: The patient exhibits a loss in voluntary control of the right leg. He also reports loss of sensation in both feet (Figure
5.23). Physical examination determines that there are losses of pain and temperature sensations involving the left half of his body
starting just below the left nipple and extending down to include his left foot. There are also loss of vibration and position
sensations and poor localization of tactile stimuli on the right side of his body starting just below the right nipple and extending
down to include his right foot. Touch, vibration, position and pain sensations are normal for the rest of the body and face. The
Romberg test is positive (i.e., The patient has difficulty standing upright with his feet together and his eyes closed).
You conclude that the somatosensory losses in his body (Figure 5.24) involve a "dissociate anesthesia"; that is, loss of
pain and temperature sensations on the left lower body
discriminative touch and proprioception on the right lower body
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter05.html 17/30

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Processes (Section 2, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department…
Server Error
404 - File or directory not found.
The resource you are looking for might have been removed,
had its name changed, or is temporarily unavailable.
Figure 5.24
The patient exhibits "dissociate anesthesia"; i.e., a loss of discriminative touch and
proprioception on one side of the body and a loss of pain on the opposite side of the
body.
Pathway(s) Affected: You conclude that structures in the following somatosensory pathways (Figure 5.25) may have been affected
the spinothalamic pathways
the medial lemniscal pathway
Figure 5.25
Neurons in the medial lemniscal pathway (MLP) process discriminative touch and
proprioception from the body, whereas those in the neospinothalamic pathway (NSTP)
process sharp pain and temperature information from the body. The right half of the spinal
cord contains the uncrossed 1° afferents of the medial lemniscal pathway, which are in the
right posterior funiculus, and the crossed 2° afferents of the neospinothalamic pathway,
which are in the right lateral funiculus.
Side & Level of Damage: Motor functions are involved and the sensory losses (Figure 5.26)
do not involve the face
involve both the spinothalamic and medial lemniscal pathways
start at the nipples and extend to the feet
are different for each side of the body (i.e., pain on the left and vibration on the right)
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter05.html 18/30

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Processes (Section 2, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department…
Figure 5.26
The results of testing somatosensory sensation for Example 5. Neither a vibrating tuning
fork applied to the right foot nor a pin prick applied to the left foot result in the appropriate
sensations. Press FOOT to view the course of action potentials generated in response to the
tuning fork on the right foot and a pin prick to the left foot. Vibration and pain sensations
are normal for the rest of the body. Press HAND to view the course of action potentials
generated in response to the tuning fork on the right hand and a pin prick to the left hand.
So, you conclude that
damage involves one half of the spinal cord (i.e., hemisection of the spinal cord, Figure 5.27)
the fifth thoracic segment of the spinal cord may be involved (Figure 5.11)
the symptoms are bilateral but involve damage to the right half of the spinal cord (i.e., The symptoms are contralesional (on
the left side) for pain and ipsilesional (on the right side) for vibration with a hemisection of the (right) spinal cord, Figure
5.27)
Figure 5.27
Damage of the right half of the spinal cord at upper thoracic levels (T5) produces the
Brown-Sequard syndrome that starts below the nipples and extends down to include the
feet. The symptoms are bilateral - with discriminative touch and proprioception lost on the
ipsilesional side and pain and temperature affected on the contralesional side.
Hemisection of the Spinal Cord. The symptoms resulting from hemisection of the spinal cord (i.e., damage to the right or left half of
the spinal cord) are collectively called the Brown-Sequard syndrome (Figure 5.27). There are both motor and sensory losses: for
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter05.html 19/30

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Processes (Section 2, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department…
now learn that the motor losses involve weakness, loss of fine motor control, and abnormal reflexes (which are characteristic of
“upper motor” neuron damage) on the ipsilesional side starting at the level of the lesion and extending down the body. For
example, if the right spinal cord is sectioned, say at T5, the motor effect is on the right side starting at the chest and extending
down to and including the right leg and foot. Because spinal cord hemisection interrupts both the posterior column and
spinothalamic tracts, there will be sensory losses that are bilateral: ipsilesional for the posterior column (discriminative touch and
proprioception) and contralesional for the spinothalamic tracts (pain and temperature). As the sensory losses in each half of the
body differ, they are sometimes referred to as “dissociate anesthesia.”
Example 1 Example 2 Example 3 Example 4 Example 5 Example 6 Example 7 Example 8
5.16 Clinical Examples:
Central Nervous System: The Spinal Cord (continued)
Example 6
Server
Error
404 -
File or
directory
not
found.
The
resource
you are
looking for
might have
been
Figure 5.28
The patient suffers from loss of pain and temperature sensations that wrap around his body at his waist.
Symptoms: The patient exhibits loss of pain and temperature sensations that are bilateral and limited to his waist area (i.e., like a
cummerbund, Figure 5.28). While pain sensation is diminished around the waist, it is normal above and below the waist.
Discriminative touch, vibration and position senses are normal in the waist area and for the rest of the body and face.
You conclude that the somatosensory losses in his body involve
pain sensations bilaterally around his waist
Pathway(s) Affected: You conclude that structures in the following somatosensory pathway (Figure 5.29) may have been affected
the spinothalamic pathways
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter05.html 20/30

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Processes (Section 2, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department…
Figure 5.29
Neurons in the neospinothalamic pathway process sharp pain and cool/cold information from the
body. Notice that the 2° neospinothalamic afferents decussate in the spinal cord within the anterior
white commissure.
Side & Level of Damage: The sensory losses (Figure 5.30)
do not involve the face
involve the spinothalamic pathways
have a segmental (dermatomal) pattern
are bilateral (analgesia on both sides of the body)
Figure 5.30
The results of testing somatosensory sensation for Example 6. Pin pricks
applied anywhere around the waist do not produce well-localized, sharp pain
sensations. Press WAIST to view the course of action potentials generated in
response to a pin prick to the right and left side of the body at the waist. Pin
pricks applied to the feet produce well-localized sensations of sharp pain. Press
FOOT to view the course of action potentials generated in response to a pin
prick to the right and left feet. Pin pricks applied to the hands produce well-
localized sensations of sharp pain. Press HAND to view the course of action
potentials generated in response to a pin prick to the right and left hands.
So, you conclude that
damage involves neospinothalamic structures in the spinal cord (Figure 5.31)
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter05.html 21/30

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Processes (Section 2, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department…
the ninth or tenth thoracic segment of the spinal cord is involved (Figure 5.11)
symptoms are bilateral and segmental as they involve damage to the decussating spinothalamic fibers in the anterior white
commissure (Figure 5.31)
Figure 5.31
Cavitation of the spinal cord central canal (syringomyelia) at lower thoracic levels (T9 or T10)
produces a bilateral loss of pain and temperature that is segmental and localized around the waist
area.
In syringomyelia, there are cysts that form within the spinal cord near the central canal (Figure 5.31). As the cyst grows, it first
compresses and then destroys the decussating fibers in the anterior white commissure. Many of these fibers belong to the
spinothalamic tracts and the resulting sensory loss involves pain and temperature sensation bilaterally and segmentally. The
bilateral loss is described to form a belt or girdle pattern - if the damage involves the lower thoracic segments, and does not involve
sensation below and above the cyst (i.e., it is segmental). As the cyst grows, it may involve anterior horn motor neurons and
produce such “lower motor” signs as weakness, muscle wasting, and loss of reflexes.
Example 1 Example 2 Example 3 Example 4 Example 5 Example 6 Example 7 Example 8
5.17 Clinical Examples:
Central Nervous System: The Brain
Brain Stem. Trauma, stroke, multiple sclerosis (a disease of myelin), and brain tumors are the major causes of brain stem lesions.
The location of the lesion site can often be deduced by the loss in cranial nerve function.
Eleven of the thirteen cranial nerves are associated with the brain stem and may be damaged with brain stem lesions.
Most of the 1° somatosensory afferents carrying crude touch, pain and temperature information from the face enter the brain
stem at mid pontine levels and descend down to second cervical segment of the spinal cord.
Axons in the spinothalamic pathway decussate in the spinal cord. The decussation in the medial lemniscal pathway occurs in
the lower medulla. Consequently, both the spinothalamic tract and medial lemniscus represent the contralateral side of the
body at and above the upper (open) medulla.
The spinal trigeminal 2° afferents decussate upon leaving the spinal trigeminal nucleus in the medulla and lower pons,
whereas the main sensory trigeminal nucleus axons decussate at mid pons levels immediately upon leaving the nucleus.
Above the level of the pons, all of the somatosensory pathways have decussated and are traveling in close proximity.
The initial higher order processing the discriminative touch and proprioception occurs exclusively within the primary
somatosensory cortex. In contrast, pain information is processed in multiple cortical areas.
Example 7
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter05.html 22/30

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Processes (Section 2, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department…
Server
Error
404 -
File or
directory
not
found.
The
resource
you are
looking for
might have
been
Figure 5.32
The patient suffers from a decrease in pain and temperature sensations involving the left side his body and the right
side of his face.
Symptoms: The patient exhibits decrease in pain and temperature sensations that involve the left side of his body and right side of
his face (Figure 5.32). Discriminative touch, vibration and position senses are normal in these areas. Touch, vibration, position,
temperature, and pain sensations are normal for the rest of the body and face.
You conclude that the somatosensory losses involve
pain and temperature sensations on the left body
pain and temperature sensations on the right side of the face
Pathway(s) Affected: You conclude that structures in the following somatosensory pathways (Figure 5.33) have been affected
the spinothalamic pathways
the spinal trigeminal pathway
Figure 5.33
Neurons of the spinothalamic pathways (NSTP, neospinothalamic and PSTP,
paleospinothalamic) process pain, temperature and crude touch information
from the body. Whereas neurons of the spinal trigeminal pathway (STP)
process pain, temperature and crude touch information from the face.
Side & Level of Damage: The sensory losses (Figure 5.34)
involve pain sensation in the body and face
involve both the spinothalamic and spinal trigeminal pathways
are bilateral (analgesia in the left body and the right face)
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter05.html 23/30

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Processes (Section 2, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department…
Figure 5.34
Results of testing somatosensory sensation for Example 7. Pin pricks into the right side of
the face and the left hand do not produce well-localized, sharp pain sensations. Press PIN
PRICK to view the course of action potentials generated in response to pin pricks into the
right side of the face and the left hand. The vibration of a tuning fork applied to the right
jaw and left hand, as well as manipulation of the jaw and fingers of the left hand produce
normal vibration and proprioceptive sensations. Press TOUCH to view the course of action
potentials generated in response to a vibrating tuning fork applied to the right side of the
face and the left hand.
So, you conclude that
the damage must be in the brain stem (Figure 5.35)
the spinothalamic and spinal trigeminal tracts are involved
the symptoms are bilateral but the damage is unilateral and involves the right half of the medulla. That is, the symptoms are
ipsilesional (right) for the face and contralesional (left) for the body
Server Error
404 - File or directory not found.
The resource you are looking for might have been removed, had its name changed, or is
temporarily unavailable.
Figure 5.35
There is damage, colored black, involving the right side of the medulla. Damage to the posterolateral medulla will
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter05.html 24/30

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Processes (Section 2, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department…
destroy the uncrossed descending 1° afferents of the spinal trigeminal pathway (STP - colored violet) and the
crossed ascending 2° afferents of the neospinothalamic pathway (NSTP - colored red). Notice that the medial
lemniscus and ventral trigeminal lemniscus, which are located in the anteromedial medulla, have been spared by
this infarct.
Wallenberg's Syndrome. In the medulla, both the spinothalamic tracts and the spinal trigeminal tracts are located posteriorly in the
area that normally receives blood via branches of the posterior inferior cerebella artery (PICA) (Figure 5.36). Consequently, an
obstruction of the PICA blood supply to the medulla will result in analgesia and thermo-anesthesia of the contralesional body
(spinothalamic tracts) and of the ipsilesional face (spinal trigeminal tract). Branches of the anterior spinal and vertebral arteries
supply more anterior areas of the upper medulla. Therefore, an infarct involving the PICA blood supply will not affect the medial
lemniscus or ventral trigeminal lemniscus. Consequently, discriminative touch and proprioception from the body and pain,
temperature and crude touch in the contralesional half of the face will not be affected with an infarct involving PICA.
Figure 5.36
Obstruction of the posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA)
will result in damage to the posterior quadrant of the
medulla. The descending spinal trigeminal tract and nucleus
and the ascending spinothalamic tract would be damaged,
whereas the medial lemniscus and ventral trigeminal
lemniscus would be spared.
Above the level of the pons (Figure 5.11), all of the major somatosensory tracts are crossed and located in close proximity.
Consequently, if the brain stem were hemisected above the pons, there would be anesthesia of the contralesional body (section of
the spinothalamic tracts which decussate in the spinal cord, and the medial lemniscus, which decussates in the medulla) and
contralesional face (section of the ventral trigeminal lemniscus which consists of 2° afferents of the spinal and main sensory
trigeminal nuclei that decussate in the medulla and pons).
Example 1 Example 2 Example 3 Example 4 Example 5 Example 6 Example 7 Example 8
5.18 Clinical Examples:
The Cortex
Somatosensory Cortex. The sensory loss from head trauma or stroke that damages the somatosensory cortex will
be contralesional, as decussations in all somatosensory pathways occur below the thalamus
be more complex, as somatosensory information is integrated at cortical levels
not result in analgesia, as pain is represented by multiple pathways (e.g. the neospinothalamic and paleospinothalamic
pathways) and in multiple cortical areas
often be accompanied by motor deficits, as the somatosensory cortex provides input to the motor cortex and motor control
signals to the brain stem and spinal cord.
Example 8
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter05.html 25/30

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Processes (Section 2, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department…
Server
Error
404 -
File or
directory
not
found.
The
resource
you are
looking for
might have
been
Figure 5.37
The patient suffers from deficits in discriminative touch and proprioceptive sensations involving the right side of his
body and face. Tactile and pain sensations are also poorly localized on his right side. He has difficulty walking and
controlling his right arm and hand and the right side of his face.
Symptoms: The patient exhibits deficits in fine motor control and in discriminative touch and proprioception on the right side of his
body and face (Figure 5.37). He has problems manipulating and identifying objects placed in his right hand (stereognosis). He is
unable to identify letters or numbers written on the skin of the right face and the palm of his right hand (graphesthesia). He also
has difficulty in judging weight differences (baragnosis) and cannot appreciate textures with his right hand. He is unable to detect
the passive movement of his right foot and the fingers of his right hand. Compared with the left side of his body pain sensations are
not as sharp, well defined or easily localized on the right side of his body. Touch, vibration, position, thermal, and pain sensations
are normal for the rest of the body and face. The patient has difficulty walking and the Romberg test is positive.
You conclude that the somatosensory losses in his body involve
discriminative touch, proprioception and sharp pain on the right body
discriminative touch, proprioception and sharp pain on the right side of his face
Pathway(s) Affected: You conclude that structures in the following somatosensory pathways (Figure 5.38) may have been affected
the medial lemniscal pathway
the main sensory trigeminal pathway
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter05.html 26/30

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Processes (Section 2, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department…
Server Error
404 - File or directory not found.
The resource you are looking for might have been
removed, had its name changed, or is temporarily
unavailable.
Figure 5.38
the neospinothalamic and spinal trigeminal pathways
Neurons of the medial lemniscal pathway (MLP) process
discriminative touch and proprioception information from
the body, whereas those of the main sensory trigeminal
pathway (MSTP) process discriminative touch and
proprioception information from the face. The neurons of
the neospinothalamic pathway (NSTP) process sharp,
cutting pain and cool/cold information from the body,
whereas those of the archispinothalamic and
paleospinothalamic pathways (PSTP) processes dull and
aching pain, warm/hot and crude touch from the body. The
neurons of the spinal trigeminal pathway (STP) process all
pain, temperature and crude touch information from the
face. Notice that thalamic neurons in the
paleospinothalamic (PSTP) and spinal trigeminal pathways
(STP) send axons to multiple cortical areas.
Side & Level of Damage: The sensory losses (Figure 5.39)
involve the body and face
are unilateral and complex in nature
involve higher order cortical functions, e.g., graphesthesia
do not include complete loss of pain information
are accompanied by motor deficits
Server Error
404 - File or directory not found.
The resource you are looking for might have been removed,
had its name changed, or is temporarily unavailable.
Figure 5.39
The results of testing somatosensory sensation in Example 8. The vibration of a
tuning fork applied to the right jaw or right hand, as well as manipulation of the
right foot, produce no vibration or proprioceptive sensations. Press TOUCH to view
the course of action potentials generated in response to a vibrating tuning fork
applied to the right jaw and the right hand. Pinching the right cheek or right hand
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter05.html 27/30

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Processes (Section 2, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department…
produce pain sensations. Press PINCH to view the course of action potentials
generated in response to pinching the right side of the face and the right hand.
So, you conclude that the damage
involves the left somatosensory parietal cortical area
may involve a branch of the middle cerebral artery (Figure 5.40)
Server Error
404 - File or directory not found.
The resource you are looking for might have been removed,
had its name changed, or is temporarily unavailable.
Figure 5.40
Subdural hemorrhage involving a parietal branch of the middle cerebral artery
injured somatosensory areas of the parietal lobe.
Somatosensory Cortex. Hemorrhage limited to somatosensory parietal areas produces contralesional astereognosis, baragnosis,
and losses in the ability to discriminate object size and texture. Also decreased or lost on the contralesional side of the body are the
ability to discriminate position and movement of body parts and the control of fine movements. The hemorrhage would not produce
a total loss of pain sensation as other cortical areas are also involved in the perception of painful stimuli. For example, the cingulate
gyrus in the frontal lobe and part of the insular cortex appear to be involved in the perception of, and emotional reaction to, painful
stimuli (Figure 5.41).
Server Error
404 - File or directory not found.
The resource you are looking for might have been removed, had
its name changed, or is temporarily unavailable.
Figure 5.41
Cortical areas involved in pain sensation. The thalamic neurons of the spinothalamic
pathways and spinal trigeminal pathway that are involved in processing pain
information send their axons to the cingulate gyrus and insular cortex. Consequently,
damage limited to the somatosensory parietal cortex will not result in the loss of all
pain sensation.
Example 1 Example 2 Example 3 Example 4 Example 5 Example 6 Example 7 Example 8
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter05.html 28/30

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Processes (Section 2, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department…
5.19 Summary
From this chapter, you should have learned how the somatosensory system is organized from the skin, muscles and joints to the
cortex. You have learned that stimulus features extracted by the somatosensory receptors are kept segregated in separate
“information channels” and processed in parallel by different chains of neurons. Information coded and carried by thousands of
spinal cord and cranial ganglion cells are distributed to millions of cortical neurons in the parietal lobe. The perceptions of coherent
somatosensory stimuli and body image are recomposed out of these fragments of information by the simultaneous activation of
large areas of cortex. You have learned how to use the somatotopic organization and the modality specificity of the different
somatosensory pathways to determine the location and extent of damage to the somatosensory structures.
Test Your Knowledge
Make the best match between the named cortical functional area and the cortical structure area.
Primary somatosensory cortex A B C D E
A. Insula
B. Postcentral gyrus
C. Precentral gyrus
D. Posterior parietal lobe
E. Parietal lobe pars opercularis
Secondary somatosensory cortex A B C D E
A. Insula
B. Postcentral gyrus
C. Precentral gyrus
D. Posterior parietal lobe
E. Parietal lobe pars opercularis
Somatosensory association cortex A B C D E
A. Insula
B. Postcentral gyrus
C. Precentral gyrus
D. Posterior parietal lobe
E. Parietal lobe pars opercularis
Question 1 A B C D E
Select the best answer: Electrical stimulation of the posterior paracentral lobe will result in the
perception of a somatosensory stimulus at the _______.
A. tongue
B. hand
C. arm
D. chest
E. foot
Question 2 A B C D E
Select the best answer: Damage to the posterior funiculus at spinal cord level T6 produces a loss
______.
A. of sharp, cutting pain sensation
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter05.html 29/30

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Processes (Section 2, Chapter 5) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department…
B. that is contralesional
C. of sensation in the arms and hands
D. that produces a positive Rhomberg sign
E. that is called the Brown-Sequard syndrome
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter05.html 30/30



1/7/25, 10:04 AM Anatomy of the Spinal Cord (Section 2, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Departme…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 2: Sensory Systems
Search
Chapter 3: Anatomy of the Spinal Cord
Nachum Dafny, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
Reviewed 07 Oct 2020
3.1 Introduction
Figure 3.1
Schematic dorsal and lateral view of the spinal cord and
four cross sections from cervical, thoracic, lumbar and
sacral levels, respectively.
The spinal cord is the most important structure between the body and the brain. The spinal cord extends from the foramen
magnum where it is continuous with the medulla to the level of the first or second lumbar vertebrae. It is a vital link between the
brain and the body, and from the body to the brain. The spinal cord is 40 to 50 cm long and 1 cm to 1.5 cm in diameter. Two
consecutive rows of nerve roots emerge on each of its sides. These nerve roots join distally to form 31 pairs of spinal nerves. The
spinal cord is a cylindrical structure of nervous tissue composed of white and gray matter, is uniformly organized and is divided into
four regions: cervical (C), thoracic (T), lumbar (L) and sacral (S), (Figure 3.1), each of which is comprised of several segments. The
spinal nerve contains motor and sensory nerve fibers to and from all parts of the body. Each spinal cord segment innervates a
dermatome (see below and Figure 3.5).
3.2 General Features
1. Similar cross-sectional structures at all spinal cord levels (Figure 3.1).
2. It carries sensory information (sensations) from the body and some from the head to the central nervous system (CNS) via
afferent fibers, and it performs the initial processing of this information.
3. Motor neurons in the ventral horn project their axons into the periphery to innervate skeletal and smooth muscles that
mediate voluntary and involuntary reflexes.
4. It contains neurons whose descending axons mediate autonomic control for most of the visceral functions.
5. It is of great clinical importance because it is a major site of traumatic injury and the locus for many disease processes.
Although the spinal cord constitutes only about 2% of the central nervous system (CNS), its functions are vital. Knowledge of spinal
cord functional anatomy makes it possible to diagnose the nature and location of cord damage and many cord diseases.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter03.html 1/13

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Anatomy of the Spinal Cord (Section 2, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Departme…
3.3 Segmental and Longitudinal Organization
The spinal cord is divided into four different regions: the cervical, thoracic, lumbar and sacral regions (Figure 3.1). The different
cord regions can be visually distinguished from one another. Two enlargements of the spinal cord can be visualized: The cervical
enlargement, which extends between C3 to T1; and the lumbar enlargements which extends between L1 to S2 (Figure 3.1).
The cord is segmentally organized. There are 31 segments, defined by 31 pairs of nerves exiting the cord. These nerves are divided
into 8 cervical, 12 thoracic, 5 lumbar, 5 sacral, and 1 coccygeal nerve (Figure 3.2). Dorsal and ventral roots enter and leave the
vertebral column respectively through intervertebral foramen at the vertebral segments corresponding to the spinal segment.
Figure 3.2
Drawing of the 8, 12, 5, 5 and 1
cervical, thoracic, lumbar, sacral
and coccygeal spinal nerves and
their exit from the vertebrate,
respectively.
The cord is sheathed in the same three meninges as is the brain: the pia, arachnoid and dura. The dura is the tough outer sheath,
the arachnoid lies beneath it, and the pia closely adheres to the surface of the cord (Figure 3.3). The spinal cord is attached to the
dura by a series of lateral denticulate ligaments emanating from the pial folds.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter03.html 2/13

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Anatomy of the Spinal Cord (Section 2, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Departme…
Figure 3.3
The three spinal cord meninges. The denticulate ligament, the dorsal root ganglion (A), and an enlarged
drawing of the meninges (B).
During the initial third month of embryonic development, the spinal cord extends the entire length of the vertebral canal and both
grow at about the same rate. As development continues, the body and the vertebral column continue to grow at a much greater
rate than the spinal cord proper. This results in displacement of the lower parts of the spinal cord with relation to the vertebrae
column. The outcome of this uneven growth is that the adult spinal cord extends to the level of the first or second lumbar
vertebrae, and the nerves grow to exit through the same intervertebral foramina as they did during embryonic development. This
growth of the nerve roots occurring within the vertebral canal, results in the lumbar, sacral, and coccygeal roots extending to their
appropriate vertebral levels (Figure 3.2).
All spinal nerves, except the first, exit below their corresponding vertebrae. In the cervical segments, there are 7 cervical vertebrae
and 8 cervical nerves (Figure 3.2). C1-C7 nerves exit above their vertebrae whereas the C8 nerve exits below the C7 vertebra. It
leaves between the C7 vertebra and the first thoracic vertebra. Therefore, each subsequent nerve leaves the cord below the
corresponding vertebra. In the thoracic and upper lumbar regions, the difference between the vertebrae and cord level is three
segments. Therefore, the root filaments of spinal cord segments have to travel longer distances to reach the corresponding
intervertebral foramen from which the spinal nerves emerge. The lumbosacral roots are known as the cauda equina (Figure 3.2).
Each spinal nerve is composed of nerve fibers that are related to the region of the muscles and skin that develops from one body
somite (segment). A spinal segment is defined by dorsal roots entering and ventral roots exiting the cord, (i.e., a spinal cord
section that gives rise to one spinal nerve is considered as a segment.) (Figure 3.4).
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter03.html 3/13

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Anatomy of the Spinal Cord (Section 2, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Departme…
Figure 3.4
(A) Drawing of the spinal cord with its spinal roots. (B) Drawing of the spinal vertebrate.
(C) Section of the spinal cord, its meninges and the dorsal and ventral roots of three
segments.
A dermatome is an area of skin supplied by peripheral nerve fibers originating from a single dorsal root ganglion. If a nerve is cut,
one loses sensation from that dermatome. Because each segment of the cord innervates a different region of the body,
dermatomes can be precisely mapped on the body surface, and loss of sensation in a dermatome can indicate the exact level of
spinal cord damage in clinical assessment of injury (Figure 3.5). It is important to consider that there is some overlap between
neighboring dermatomes. Because sensory information from the body is relayed to the CNS through the dorsal roots, the axons
originating from dorsal root ganglion cells are classified as primary sensory afferents, and the dorsal root's neurons are the first
order (1°) sensory neuron. Most axons in the ventral roots arise from motor neurons in the ventral horn of the spinal cord and
innervate skeletal muscle. Others arise from the lateral horn and synapse on autonomic ganglia that innervate visceral organs. The
ventral root axons join with the peripheral processes of the dorsal root ganglion cells to form mixed afferent and efferent spinal
nerves, which merge to form peripheral nerves. Knowledge of the segmental innervation of the cutaneous area and the muscles is
essential to diagnose the site of an injury.
Figure 3.5
Innervation arising from single dorsal root ganglion supplied specific skin area (a
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter03.html 4/13

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Anatomy of the Spinal Cord (Section 2, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Departme…
dermatome). The numbers refer to the spinal segments by which each nerve is
named C = cervical; T = thoracic; L = lumbar; S = sacral spinal cord segments
(dermatome).
3.4 Internal Structure of the Spinal Cord
A transverse section of the adult spinal cord shows white matter in the periphery, gray matter inside, and a tiny central canal filled
with CSF at its center. Surrounding the canal is a single layer of cells, the ependymal layer. Surrounding the ependymal layer is the
gray matter – a region containing cell bodies – shaped like the letter “H” or a “butterfly”. The two “wings” of the butterfly are
connected across the midline by the dorsal gray commissure and below the white commissure (Figure 3.6). The shape and size of
the gray matter varies according to spinal cord level. At the lower levels, the ratio between gray matter and white matter is greater
than in higher levels, mainly because lower levels contain less ascending and descending nerve fibers. (Figure 3.1 and Figure 3.6).
Figure 3.6
Spinal cord section showing the white and the gray matter in four spinal cord levels.
The gray matter mainly contains the cell bodies of neurons and glia and is divided into four main columns: dorsal horn,
intermediate column, lateral horn and ventral horn column. (Figure 3.6).
The dorsal horn is found at all spinal cord levels and is comprised of sensory nuclei that receive and process incoming
somatosensory information. From there, ascending projections emerge to transmit the sensory information to the midbrain and
diencephalon. The intermediate column and the lateral horn comprise autonomic neurons innervating visceral and pelvic organs.
The ventral horn comprises motor neurons that innervate skeletal muscle.
At all the levels of the spinal cord, nerve cells in the gray substance are multipolar, varying much in their morphology. Many of them
are Golgi type I and Golgi type II nerve cells. The axons of Golgi type I are long and pass out of the gray matter into the ventral
spinal roots or the fiber tracts of the white matter. The axons and dendrites of the Golgi type II cells are largely confined to the
neighboring neurons in the gray matter.
A more recent classification of neurons within the gray matter is based on function. These cells are located at all levels of the spinal
cord and are grouped into three main categories: root cells, column or tract cells and propriospinal cells.
The root cells are situated in the ventral and lateral gray horns and vary greatly in size. The most prominent features of the root
cells are large multipolar elements exceeding 25 µm of their somata. The root cells contribute their axons to the ventral roots of the
spinal nerves and are grouped into two major divisions: 1) somatic efferent root neurons, which innervate the skeletal musculature;
and 2) the visceral efferent root neurons, also called preganglionic autonomic axons, which send their axons to various autonomic
ganglia.
The column or tract cells and their processes are located mainly in the dorsal gray horn and are confined entirely within the CNS.
The axons of the column cells form longitudinal ascending tracts that ascend in the white columns and terminate upon neurons
located rostrally in the brain stem, cerebellum or diencephalon. Some column cells send their axons up and down the cord to
terminate in gray matter close to their origin and are known as intersegmental association column cells. Other column cell axons
terminate within the segment in which they originate and are called intrasegmental association column cells. Still other column cells
send their axons across the midline to terminate in gray matter close to their origin and are called commissure association column
cells.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter03.html 5/13

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Anatomy of the Spinal Cord (Section 2, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Departme…
The propriospinal cells are spinal interneurons whose axons do not leave the spinal cord proper. Propriospinal cells account for
about 90% of spinal neurons. Some of these fibers also are found around the margin of the gray matter of the cord and are
collectively called the fasciculus proprius or the propriospinal or the archispinothalamic tract.
3.5 Spinal Cord Nuclei and Laminae
Spinal neurons are organized into nuclei and laminae.
3.6 Nuclei
The prominent nuclear groups of cell columns within the spinal cord from dorsal to ventral are the marginal zone, substantia
gelatinosa, nucleus proprius, dorsal nucleus of Clarke, intermediolateral nucleus and the lower motor neuron nuclei.
Figure 3.7
Spinal cord nuclei and laminae.
Marginal zone nucleus or posterior marginalis, is found at all spinal cord levels as a thin layer of column/tract cells (column cells)
that caps the tip of the dorsal horn. The axons of its neurons contribute to the lateral spinothalamic tract which relays pain and
temperature information to the diencephalon (Figure 3.7).
Substantia gelatinosa is found at all levels of the spinal cord. Located in the dorsal cap-like portion of the head of the dorsal horn, it
relays pain, temperature and mechanical (light touch) information and consists mainly of column cells (intersegmental column
cells). These column cells synapse in cell at Rexed layers IV to VII, whose axons contribute to the ventral (anterior) and lateral
spinal thalamic tracts. The homologous substantia gelatinosa in the medulla is the spinal trigeminal nucleus.
Nucleus proprius is located below the substantia gelatinosa in the head and neck of the dorsal horn. This cell group, sometimes
called the chief sensory nucleus, is associated with mechanical and temperature sensations. It is a poorly defined cell column which
extends through all segments of the spinal cord and its neurons contribute to ventral and lateral spinal thalamic tracts, as well as to
spinal cerebellar tracts. The axons originating in nucleus proprius project to the thalamus via the spinothalamic tract and to the
cerebellum via the ventral spinocerebellar tract (VSCT).
Dorsal nucleus of Clarke is a cell column located in the mid-portion of the base form of the dorsal horn. The axons from these cells
pass uncrossed to the lateral funiculus and form the dorsal (posterior) spinocerebellar tract (DSCT), which subserve unconscious
proprioception from muscle spindles and Golgi tendon organs to the cerebellum, and some of them innervate spinal interneurons.
The dorsal nucleus of Clarke is found only in segments C8 to L3 of the spinal cord and is most prominent in lower thoracic and
upper lumbar segments. The homologous dorsal nucleus of Clarke in the medulla is the accessory cuneate nucleus, which is the
origin of the cuneocerebellar tract (CCT).
Intermediolateral nucleus is located in the intermediate zone between the dorsal and the ventral horns in the spinal cord levels.
Extending from C8 to L3, it receives viscerosensory information and contains preganglionic sympathetic neurons, which form the
lateral horn. A large proportion of its cells are root cells which send axons into the ventral spinal roots via the white rami to reach
the sympathetic tract as preganglionic fibers. Similarly, cell columns in the intermediolateral nucleus located at the S2 to S4 levels
contains preganglionic parasympathetic neurons (Figure 3.7).
Lower motor neuron nuclei are located in the ventral horn of the spinal cord. They contain predominantly motor nuclei consisting of
α, β and γ motor neurons and are found at all levels of the spinal cord--they are root cells. The a motor neurons are the final
common pathway of the motor system, and they innervate the visceral and skeletal muscles.
3.7 Rexed Laminae
The distribution of cells and fibers within the gray matter of the spinal cord exhibits a pattern of lamination. The cellular pattern of
each lamina is composed of various sizes or shapes of neurons (cytoarchitecture) which led Rexed to propose a new classification
based on 10 layers (laminae). This classification is useful since it is related more accurately to function than the previous
classification scheme which was based on major nuclear groups (Figure 3.7).
Laminae I to IV, in general, are concerned with exteroceptive sensation and comprise the dorsal horn, whereas laminae V and VI
are concerned primarily with proprioceptive sensations. Lamina VII is equivalent to the intermediate zone and acts as a relay
between muscle spindle to midbrain and cerebellum, and laminae VIII-IX comprise the ventral horn and contain mainly motor
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter03.html 6/13

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Anatomy of the Spinal Cord (Section 2, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Departme…
neurons. The axons of these neurons innervate mainly skeletal muscle. Lamina X surrounds the central canal and contains
neuroglia.
Rexed lamina I – Consists of a thin layer of cells that cap the tip of the dorsal horn with small dendrites and a complex array of
nonmyelinated axons. Cells in lamina I respond mainly to noxious and thermal stimuli. Lamina I cell axons join the contralateral
spinothalamic tract; this layer corresponds to nucleus posteromarginalis.
Rexed lamina II – Composed of tightly packed interneurons. This layer corresponds to the substantia gelatinosa and responds to
noxious stimuli while others respond to non-noxious stimuli. The majority of neurons in Rexed lamina II axons receive information
from sensory dorsal root ganglion cells as well as descending dorsolateral fasciculus (DLF) fibers. They send axons to Rexed
laminae III and IV (fasciculus proprius). High concentrations of substance P and opiate receptors have been identified in Rexed
lamina II. The lamina is believed to be important for the modulation of sensory input, with the effect of determining which pattern
of incoming information will produce sensations that will be interpreted by the brain as being painful.
Rexed lamina III – Composed of variable cell size, axons of these neurons bifurcate several times and form a dense plexus.
Cells in this layer receive axodendritic synapses from Aβ fibers entering dorsal root fibers. It contains dendrites of cells from
laminae IV, V and VI. Most of the neurons in lamina III function as propriospinal/interneuron cells.
Rexed lamina IV – The thickest of the first four laminae. Cells in this layer receive Aß axons which carry predominantly non-
noxious information. In addition, dendrites of neurons in lamina IV radiate to lamina II, and respond to stimuli such as light touch.
The ill-defined nucleus proprius is located in the head of this layer. Some of the cells project to the thalamus via the contralateral
and ipsilateral spinothalamic tract.
Rexed lamina V – Composed neurons with their dendrites in lamina II. The neurons in this lamina receive monosynaptic
information from Aß, Ad and C axons which also carry nociceptive information from visceral organs. This lamina covers a broad
zone extending across the neck of the dorsal horn and is divided into medial and lateral parts. Many of the Rexed lamina V cells
project to the brain stem and the thalamus via the contralateral and ipsilateral spinothalamic tract. Moreover, descending
corticospinal and rubrospinal fibers synapse upon its cells.
Rexed lamina VI – Is a broad layer which is best developed in the cervical and lumbar enlargements. Lamina VI divides also into
medial and lateral parts. Group Ia afferent axons from muscle spindles terminate in the medial part at the C8 to L3 segmental
levels and are the source of the ipsilateral spinocerebellar pathways. Many of the small neurons are interneurons participating in
spinal reflexes, while descending brainstem pathways project to the lateral zone of Rexed layer VI.
Rexed lamina VII – This lamina occupies a large heterogeneous region. This region is also known as the zona intermedia (or
intermediolateral nucleus). Its shape and boundaries vary along the length of the cord. Lamina VII neurons receive information
from Rexed lamina II to VI as well as visceral afferent fibers, and they serve as an intermediary relay in transmission of visceral
motor neurons impulses. The dorsal nucleus of Clarke forms a prominent round oval cell column from C8 to L3. The large cells give
rise to uncrossed nerve fibers of the dorsal spinocerebellar tract (DSCT). Cells in laminae V to VII, which do not form a discrete
nucleus, give rise to uncrossed fibers that form the ventral spinocerebellar tract (VSCT). Cells in the lateral horn of the cord in
segments T1 and L3 give rise to preganglionic sympathetic fibers to innervate postganglionic cells located in the sympathetic
ganglia outside the cord. Lateral horn neurons at segments S2 to S4 give rise to preganglionic neurons of the sacral
parasympathetic fibers to innervate postganglionic cells located in peripheral ganglia.
Rexed lamina VIII – Includes an area at the base of the ventral horn, but its shape differs at various cord levels. In the cord
enlargements, the lamina occupies only the medial part of the ventral horn, where descending vestibulospinal and reticulospinal
fibers terminate. The neurons of lamina VIII modulate motor activity, most probably via g motor neurons which innervate the
intrafusal muscle fibers.
Rexed lamina IX – Composed of several distinct groups of large a motor neurons and small γ and β motor neurons embedded
within this layer. Its size and shape differ at various cord levels. In the cord enlargements the number of α motor neurons increase
and they form numerous groups. The α motor neurons are large and multipolar cells and give rise to ventral root fibers to supply
extrafusal skeletal muscle fibers, while the small γ motor neurons give rise to the intrafusal muscle fibers. The α motor neurons are
somatotopically organized.
Rexed lamina X – Neurons in Rexed lamina X surround the central canal and occupy the commissural lateral area of the gray
commissure, which also contains decussating axons.
In summary, laminae I-IV are concerned with exteroceptive sensations, whereas laminae V and VI are concerned primarily with
proprioceptive sensation and act as a relay between the periphery to the midbrain and the cerebellum. Laminae VIII and IX form
the final motor pathway to initiate and modulate motor activity via α, β and γ motor neurons, which innervate striated muscle. All
visceral motor neurons are located in lamina VII and innervate neurons in autonomic ganglia.
3.8 White Matter
Surrounding the gray matter is white matter containing myelinated and unmyelinated nerve fibers. These fibers conduct information
up (ascending) or down (descending) the cord. The white matter is divided into the dorsal (or posterior) column (or funiculus),
lateral column and ventral (or anterior) column (Figure 3.8). The anterior white commissure resides in the center of the spinal cord,
and it contains crossing nerve fibers that belong to the spinothalamic tracts, spinocerebellar tracts, and anterior corticospinal tracts.
Three general nerve fiber types can be distinguished in the spinal cord white matter: 1) long ascending nerve fibers originally from
the column cells, which make synaptic connections to neurons in various brainstem nuclei, cerebellum and dorsal thalamus, 2) long
descending nerve fibers originating from the cerebral cortex and various brainstem nuclei to synapse within the different Rexed
layers in the spinal cord gray matter, and 3) shorter nerve fibers interconnecting various spinal cord levels such as the fibers
responsible for the coordination of flexor reflexes. Ascending tracts are found in all columns whereas descending tracts are found
only in the lateral and the anterior columns.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter03.html 7/13

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Anatomy of the Spinal Cord (Section 2, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Departme…
Figure 3.8
The spinal cord white matter and its three columns, and the topographical location of the main
ascending spinal cord tracts.
Four different terms are often used to describe bundles of axons such as those found in the white matter: funiculus, fasciculus,
tract, and pathway. Funiculus is a morphological term to describe a large group of nerve fibers which are located in a given area
(e.g., posterior funiculus). Within a funiculus, groups of fibers from diverse origins, which share common features, are sometimes
arranged in smaller bundles of axons called fasciculus, (e.g., fasciculus proprius [Figure 3.8]). Fasciculus is primarily a
morphological term whereas tracts and pathways are also terms applied to nerve fiber bundles which have a functional connotation.
A tract is a group of nerve fibers which usually has the same origin, destination, and course and also has similar functions. The tract
name is derived from their origin and their termination (i.e., corticospinal tract - a tract that originates in the cortex and terminates
in the spinal cord; lateral spinothalamic tract - a tract originated in the lateral spinal cord and ends in the thalamus). A pathway
usually refers to the entire neuronal circuit responsible for a specific function, and it includes all the nuclei and tracts which are
associated with that function. For example, the spinothalamic pathway includes the cell bodies of origin (in the dorsal root ganglia),
their axons as they project through the dorsal roots, synapses in the spinal cord, and projections of second and third order neurons
across the white commissure, which ascend to the thalamus in the spinothalamic tracts.
3.9 Spinal Cord Tracts
The spinal cord white matter contains ascending and descending tracts.
Ascending tracts (Figure 3.8). The nerve fibers comprise the ascending tract emerge from the first order (1°) neuron located in
the dorsal root ganglion (DRG). The ascending tracts transmit sensory information from the sensory receptors to higher levels of
the CNS. The ascending gracile and cuneate fasciculi occupying the dorsal column, and sometimes are named the dorsal funiculus.
These fibers carry information related to tactile, two point discrimination of simultaneously applied pressure, vibration, position, and
movement sense and conscious proprioception. In the lateral column (funiculus), the neospinothalamic tract (or lateral
spinothalamic tract) is located more anteriorly and laterally, and carries pain, temperature and crude touch information from
somatic and visceral structures. Nearby laterally, the dorsal and ventral spinocerebellar tracts carry unconscious proprioception
information from muscles and joints of the lower extremity to the cerebellum. In the ventral column (funiculus) there are four
prominent tracts: 1) the paleospinothalamic tract (or anterior spinothalamic tract) is located which carry pain, temperature, and
information associated with touch to the brain stem nuclei and to the diencephalon, 2) the spinoolivary tract carries information
from Golgi tendon organs to the cerebellum, 3) the spinoreticular tract, and 4) the spinotectal tract. Intersegmental nerve fibers
traveling for several segments (2 to 4) and are located as a thin layer around the gray matter is known as fasciculus proprius,
spinospinal or archispinothalamic tract. It carries pain information to the brain stem and diencephalon.
Descending tracts (Figure 3.9). The descending tracts originate from different cortical areas and from brain stem nuclei. The
descending pathway carry information associated with maintenance of motor activities such as posture, balance, muscle tone, and
visceral and somatic reflex activity. These include the lateral corticospinal tract and the rubrospinal tracts located in the lateral
column (funiculus). These tracts carry information associated with voluntary movement. Other tracts such as the reticulospinal
vestibulospinal and the anterior corticospinal tract mediate balance and postural movements (Figure 3.9). Lissauer's tract, which is
wedged between the dorsal horn and the surface of the spinal cord carry the descending fibers of the dorsolateral funiculus (DFL),
which regulate incoming pain sensation at the spinal level, and intersegmental fibers. Additional details about ascending and
descending tracts are described in the next few chapters.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter03.html 8/13

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Anatomy of the Spinal Cord (Section 2, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Departme…
Figure 3.9
The main descending spinal cord tracts.
3.10 Dorsal Root
Figure 3.10
Spinal cord section with its ventral and dorsal root fibers and ganglion.
Information from the skin, skeletal muscle and joints is relayed to the spinal cord by sensory cells located in the dorsal root ganglia.
The dorsal root fibers are the axons originated from the primary sensory dorsal root ganglion cells. Each ascending dorsal root
axon, before reaching the spinal cord, bifurcates into ascending and descending branches entering several segments below and
above their own segment. The ascending dorsal root fibers and the descending ventral root fibers from and to discrete body areas
form a spinal nerve (Figure 3.10). There are 31 paired spinal nerves. The dorsal root fibers segregate into lateral and medial
divisions. The lateral division contains most of the unmyelinated and small myelinated axons carrying pain and temperature
information to be terminated in the Rexed laminae I, II, and IV of the gray matter. The medial division of dorsal root fibers consists
mainly of myelinated axons conducting sensory fibers from skin, muscles and joints; it enters the dorsal/posterior column/funiculus
and ascend in the dorsal column to be terminated in the ipsilateral nucleus gracilis or nucleus cuneatus at the medulla oblongata
region, i.e., the axons of the first-order (1°) sensory neurons synapse in the medulla oblongata on the second order (2°) neurons
(in nucleus gracilis or nucleus cuneatus). In entering the spinal cord, all fibers send collaterals to different Rexed lamina.
Axons entering the cord in the sacral region are found in the dorsal column near the midline and comprise the fasciculus gracilis,
whereas axons that enter at higher levels are added in lateral positions and comprise the fasciculus cuneatus (Figure 3.11). This
orderly representation is termed “somatotopic representation”.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter03.html 9/13

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Anatomy of the Spinal Cord (Section 2, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Departme…
Figure 3.11
Somatotopical representation of the spinal thalamic tract and the
dorsal column.
3.11 Ventral Root
Ventral root fibers are the axons of motor and visceral efferent fibers and emerge from poorly defined ventral lateral sulcus as
ventral rootlets. The ventral rootlets from discrete spinal cord section unite and form the ventral root, which contain motor nerve
axons from motor and visceral motor neurons. The α motor nerve axons innervate the extrafusal muscle fibers while the small γ
motor neuron axons innervate the intrafusal muscle fibers located within the muscle spindles. The visceral neurons send
preganglionic fibers to innervate the visceral organs. All these fibers join the dorsal root fibers distal to the dorsal root ganglion to
form the spinal nerve (Figure 3.10).
3.12 Spinal Nerve Roots
The spinal nerve roots are formed by the union of dorsal and ventral roots within the intervertebral foramen, resulting in a mixed
nerve joined together and forming the spinal nerve (Figure 3.10). Spinal nerve rami include the dorsal primary nerves (ramus),
which innervates the skin and muscles of the back, and the ventral primary nerves (ramus), which innervates the ventral lateral
muscles and skin of the trunk, extremities and visceral organs. The ventral and dorsal roots also provide the anchorage and fixation
of the spinal cord to the vertebral cauda.
3.13 Blood Supply of the Spinal Cord
The arterial blood supply to the spinal cord in the upper cervical regions is derived from two branches of the vertebral arteries, the
anterior spinal artery and the posterior spinal arteries (Figure 3.12). At the level of medulla, the paired anterior spinal arteries join
to form a single artery that lies in the anterior median fissure of the spinal cord. The posterior spinal arteries are paired and form
an anastomotic chain over the posterior aspect of the spinal cord. A plexus of small arteries, the arterial vasocorona, on the surface
of the cord constitutes an anastomotic connection between the anterior and posterior spinal arteries. This arrangement provides
uninterrupted blood supplies along the entire length of the spinal cord.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter03.html 10/13

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Anatomy of the Spinal Cord (Section 2, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Departme…
Figure 3.12
The spinal cord arterial circulation.
At spinal cord regions below upper cervical levels, the anterior and posterior spinal arteries narrow and form an anastomotic
network with radicular arteries. The radicular arteries are branches of the cervical, trunk, intercostal & iliac arteries. The radicular
arteries supply most of the lower levels of the spinal cord. There are approximately 6 to 8 pairs of radicular arteries supplying the
anterior and posterior spinal cord (Figure 3.12).
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
The spinal cord...
A. Occupies the lumbar cistern
B. Has twelve (12) cervical segments
C. Contains the cell bodies of postganglionic sympathetic efferent neurons
D. Ends at the conus medullaris
E. Has no arachnoid membrane
Question 2 A B C D E
Which of the following tracts crosses at the spinal cord level of entry?
A. Corticospinal
B. Ventral spinothalamic
C. Ventral spinocerebellar
D. Anterior spinocerebellar
E. Dorsal spinocerebellar
Question 3 A B C D E
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter03.html 11/13

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Anatomy of the Spinal Cord (Section 2, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Departme…
The blood supply for the corticospinal tract is derived from the:
A. Vertebral arteries
B. Posterior spinal arteries
C. Anterior spinal artery
D. Basilar artery
E. Posterior communicating artery
Question 4 A B C D E
In the laminar somatotopic organization of the dorsal columns, the most lateral fibers represent:
A. Sacral region
B. Thoracic region
C. Lumbar region
D. Cervical region
E. Coccygeal region
Question 5 A B C D E
Syringomyelia syndrome occurs with selective spinal lesions in the:
A. Dorsal root ganglia
B. Fibers decussating in the spinal white commissure
C. Fibers of the anterior spinal thalamic tract
D. Ventral root ganglia
E. Fibers of the dorsal spinocerebellar tract
Question 6 A B C D E
Spinal root neurons are:
A. Neurons in the laminae II
B. Motor neurons
C. Somatic efferent neurons
D. Internuncial neurons
E. Commissural neurons
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter03.html 12/13

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Anatomy of the Spinal Cord (Section 2, Chapter 3) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Departme…
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter03.html 13/13



1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Systems (Section 2, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department o…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 2: Sensory Systems
Search
Chapter 2: Somatosensory Systems
Patrick Dougherty, Ph.D., Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, MD Anderson Cancer Center
(content provided by Chieyeko Tsuchitani, Ph.D.)
Reviewed 19 Oct 2020
The somatosensory systems inform us about objects in our external environment through touch (i.e., physical contact with skin)
and about the position and movement of our body parts (proprioception) through the stimulation of muscle and joints. The
somatosensory systems also monitor the temperature of the body, external objects and environment, and provide information
about painful, itchy and tickling stimuli. The sensory information processed by the somatosensory systems travels along different
anatomical pathways depending on the information carried. For example, the posterior column-medial lemniscal pathway carries
discriminative touch and proprioceptive information from the body, and the main sensory trigeminal pathway carries this
information from the face. Whereas, the spinothalamic pathways carry crude touch, pain and temperature information from the
body, and the spinal trigeminal pathway carries this information from the face.
This first series of chapters on somatosensory systems concentrates on the somatosensory systems that provide accurate
information about the location and temporal features of stimuli and about sharp pain, tactile stimuli and the position and movement
of body parts. This chapter describes somatosensory stimuli, the sensations produced when they are applied, and the cutaneous,
muscle, and joint receptors that are responsible for initiating the perceived somatic sensations. Subsequent chapters describe the
pathways processing other pain, temperature, crude touch and visceral sensations.
2.1 Somatic Stimuli
Modality Specificity in the Somatosensory System. The somatosensory systems process information about, and
represent, several modalities of somatic sensation (i.e., pain, temperature, touch, proprioception). Each of these modalities can be
divided into sub-modalities, as shown in Table 1 (e.g., pain into sharp, pricking, cutting pain; dull, burning pain; and deep aching
pain). Discriminative touch is also subdivided into touch, pressure, flutter and vibration. Each of these sensations (i.e., sub-
modalities) is represented by neurons that exhibit modality specificity. That is, when a somatosensory neuron is stimulated
naturally (e.g., by skin warming) or artificially (e.g., by electrical stimulation of the neuron), the sensation perceived is specific to
the information normally processed by the neuron (i.e., warm skin). Consequently, a "warm" somatosensory neuron will not
respond to cooling of the skin or to a touch stimulus that does not "warm" the skin. The somatosensory receptor and its central
connections determine the modality specificity of the neurons forming a somatosensory pathway.
Table I
The Sensory Modalities Represented by the Somatosensory Systems
Sub-Sub Somatosensory Pathway Somatosensory Pathway
Modality Sub Modality
Modality (Body) (Face)
sharp cutting pain Neospinothalamic
Pain dull burning pain Paleospinothalamic
deep aching pain Archispinothalamic
Spinal Trigeminal
warm/hot Paleospinothalamic
Temperature
cool/cold Neospinothalamic
itch/tickle & crude touch Paleospinothalamic
touch Medial Lemniscal Main Sensory Trigeminal
Touch pressure
discriminative touch
flutter
vibration
Proprioception muscle length
Position: Static Forces muscle tension
joint pressure
Movement: Dynamic muscle length
Forces muscle tension
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter02.html 1/16

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Systems (Section 2, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department o…
joint pressure
joint angle
Tactile Stimuli. Tactile stimuli are external forces in physical contact with the skin that give rise to the sensations of touch,
pressure, flutter, or vibration. We normally think of touch as involving minimal force on-or-by an object that produces very little
distortion of the skin. In contrast, pressure involves a greater force that displaces the skin and underlying tissue. Time varying
tactile stimuli produce more complex sensations such as object movement or object flutter (20 to 50 Hz) or vibration (100 to 300
Hz). An initial clinical examination of discriminative touch often involves testing the vibratory sense by applying a 128 Hz tuning
fork over a bony prominence.
Proprioceptive Stimuli.1 Proprioceptive stimuli are internal forces that are generated by the position or movement of a body
part. Static forces on the joints, muscles and tendons, which maintain limb position against the force of gravity, indicate the
position of a limb. The movement of a limb is indicated by dynamic changes in the forces applied to muscles, tendons and joints. An
initial clinical examination of proprioception often involves testing the position sense by having the patient, with eyes closed, touch
one finger with another after the target finger has been moved.
Proprioception is critical for maintaining posture and balance. Somatosensory proprioceptive cues are combined with
vestibular proprioceptive cues and visual cues to control motor responses to changes in body/head position. During a clinical
examination, the Romberg test requires the patient to maintain balance while standing with feet together and eyes closed. It tests
whether the proprioceptive components are working properly when the visual cues are missing and proprioceptive cues are the
major sources of information.
Sharp Cutting Pain Stimuli. Painful (nociceptive) stimuli are tissue-damaging sources of energy that may be external or
internal to the body surface. Sharp, cutting pain is the sensation elicited on initial contact with the painful stimulus. The sensation
of dull, burning pain may follow as a consequence of tissue inflammation. An initial clinical examination of the pain sense often
involves testing sharp, cutting pain sensitivity by asking the patient, who has her/his eyes closed, what they feel when pricked with
a pin. Pain mechanisms and pathways are described in detail in later chapters.
2.2 Introduction to Peripheral Organization of Somatosensory Systems
Peripheral Somatosensory Neurons. The cell bodies of the first-order (1°) somatosensory afferent neurons2 are located in
posterior root or cranial root ganglia (i.e., are part of the peripheral nervous system, Figure 2.1). The 1° afferents are
pseudounipolar cells. The cell body gives rise to a single process that divides to form a peripheral axon and a central axon. The
peripheral axon travels to and ends in the skin, muscle, tendon or joint and the central axon travels to and ends in the central
nervous system.
Somatosensory Receptor Organ. The receptors of most sensory systems are located in specialized sensory receptor organs
(e.g., the photoreceptors in the eye and the auditory and vestibular hair cells in the inner ear) or within a restricted part of the
body (e.g., the taste buds in the mouth and the olfactory receptors in the olfactory mucosa of the nose). For the tactile component
of the somatosensory system, the skin covering the entire body, head and face functions as the touch receptor organ, whereas joint
tissues, muscles and tendons act as the proprioception receptor organs. These sensory receptor organs "house" the somatosensory
receptors and deliver the somatosensory stimuli to the receptors.
Sensory Receptors. Specialized sensory receptor cells (e.g., the photoreceptors of the eye) are located in specialized receptor
organs, produce receptor potentials, contain synaptic specializations, and release neural transmitters (Figure 2.2). Specialized
sensory receptors may be modified neurons (e.g., the photoreceptors and olfactory receptors) or modified epithelial cells (e.g.,
taste receptors and the auditory and vestibular hair cells).
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter02.html 2/16

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Systems (Section 2, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department o…
Figure 2.1 Figure 2.2
The somatosensory first-order (1°) afferent is a pseudounipolar The specialized sensory receptors of the
neuron, which has a single process that divides into a peripheral auditory and visual systems. These cells
process and a central process. The peripheral process is part of are specialized neurons (A. visual
the peripheral nervous system (PNS) and terminates to form or receptors) or specialized epithelial cells
end on a somatosensory receptor in skin, muscle or joint. The (B. auditory receptors) that generate
central process travels to the central nervous system (CNS) where receptor potentials and contain synaptic
it terminates on a spinal cord or brain stem neuron. vesicles.
There is only one type of sensory receptor cell in the somatosensory system, the Merkel cells, and they are found only in skin. The
vast majority of somatosensory receptors are not specialized receptor cells. That is, they are formed by the endings of the
somatosensory 1° afferent peripheral axon and adjacent tissue (Figure 2.3). There is no synaptic specialization or neurotransmitter
within the adjacent tissue. The adjacent tissue also does not generate receptor potentials.
Figure 2.3
(A) When stimulated, the auditory
receptor cell generates a receptor
potential (1), which results in the release
of neurotransmitter at its synapse with the
auditory 1° afferent. The neurotransmitter
depolarizes the 1° afferent, which
generates action potentials (2 & 3) that
travel to the 1° afferent synaptic terminals
on 2° afferents in the central nervous
system. The 2° afferent generates action
potentials (4) in response to the
transmitter release by the 1° afferent.
(B) Most somatosensory receptors are not
specialized receptor cells and are formed
by the terminal endings of the
somatosensory 1° afferents. It is the 1°
afferent terminal that produces a
generator potential (1) which, in turn,
initiates action potentials (2 & 3) in the 1°
afferent axon. The 1° afferent releases
neurotransmitter on 2° afferents in the
central nervous system. The 2° afferent
generates action potentials (4) in
response to the transmitter by the 1°
afferent.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter02.html 3/16

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Systems (Section 2, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department o…
Instead of ending on specialized receptors, most peripheral axons of somatosensory 1° afferents travel to skin, muscle or joint,
branch near their terminal sites, and end in the skin (Figure 2.4), muscle, tendon or joint tissue.
Figure 2.4
The primary (1°) somatosensory afferent neuron. The 1°
afferent's cell body is located in the ganglion of a cranial or
posterior (spinal) nerve root. The 1° afferent's peripheral
process travels to skin, muscle or joint - where it branches into
terminal fibers. Each terminal fiber forms, or ends on, a
somatosensory receptor. The 1° afferent's central process joins
a cranial or spinal nerve and enters the brain stem or spinal cord
- where it synapses with a 2° somatosensory neuron.
All the peripheral terminal branches of a 1° somatosensory axon end in a specific type of tissue (e.g., skin) and not in multiple
types of tissue (i.e., not in skin and muscle). All the peripheral terminal branches of a 1° axon form only one type of somatosensory
receptor.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter02.html 4/16

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Systems (Section 2, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department o…
Figure 2.5
The locations of somatosensory receptors in the body.
Many of the 1° somatosensory afferent terminals are enveloped in a connective tissue capsule along with surrounding muscle,
tendon or cutaneous cells, or end on hair follicles. The hair follicles and the encapsulated tissue adjacent to the 1° afferent
terminals (i.e., skin, muscle, tendon, and joint tissues) contain no synaptic specializations and do not generate receptor potentials
or release neural transmitters. The complex of encapsulated tissue and afferent endings and the complex of hair follicle and afferent
endings play a role in the receptor transduction process, and each complex is considered to form a "somatosensory receptor". Many
other 1° somatosensory axons branch and terminate in skin, muscle, or joint as free nerve endings. These endings are bare of
myelin, are not encapsulated and are not associated with a specific type of tissue.
The sensitivity of the receptors to specific stimuli (e.g., touch verses muscle stretch) is determined by the location of the receptor
and by the non-neural tissue surrounding the 1° afferent terminal (Figure 2.6).
Figure 2.6
The locations of cutaneous (somatosensory) receptors in hairy and non-hairy
(glabrous) skin.
2.3 Sensory Transduction
The Adequate Stimulus. The adequate somatosensory stimulus (i.e., the stimulus to which a somatosensory neuron is most
sensitive) is either a mechanical force, a temperature change, tissue damage, or a chemical action. The discriminative touch and
proprioceptive systems are most sensitive to mechanical force. Consequently, their sensory receptors are of the mechanoreceptor
category.
Sensory Transduction. The non-neural tissue surrounding the peripheral ending of the somatosensory 1° afferent helps
concentrate and deliver the stimulus (e.g., mechanical force) onto the 1° afferent terminal membrane. Somatosensory
mechanoreceptors function to transduce the applied mechanical force into an electrical potential change in the 1° afferent
neuron.
The mechanoreceptor 1° afferent terminal membrane contains ion channels that respond to mechanical distortion by increasing
sodium and potassium conductance (i.e., the channels are stress gated). Generator potentials are produced as sodium and
potassium flow down their electrochemical gradients to depolarize the terminal ending (see Figure 2.3B). In most cases, the
magnitude and duration of the generator potentials are related to the applied mechanical force: the greater the mechanical force,
the greater is the depolarization, and the longer the mechanical force is applied, the longer the terminal remains depolarized
(Figure 2.7). Terminals that do not sustain the depolarization for the duration of the mechanical distortion are called rapidly
adapting. Terminals that sustain the depolarization with minimal decrease in amplitude for the duration of a stimulus are called
slowly adapting.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter02.html 5/16

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Systems (Section 2, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department o…
Figure 2.7
At the TOP of this figure, two 1° somatosensory neurons are illustrated.
A mechanical force (A) is applied and the responses are measured by a
recording electrode in the somatosensory receptor (B), and a recording
electrode in the axon (C). BELOW The responses of somatosensory 1°
afferent neurons to stimulation of the receptor with a sustained
stimulus are illustrated for rapidly adapting afferents (LEFT panel) and
slowly adapting afferents (RIGHT panel). The time course of the
applied force or skin displacement (A); generator potential recorded in
the receptor (B); and the action potentials recorded from the 1°
afferent axon (C) are illustrated. Notice that the Ruffini corpuscle and
Merkel disk and their 1° afferent responses are best suited to transduce
and transmit information about long-lasting (maintained or sustained)
stimuli that do not vary over time.
The generator potential spreads passively along the 1° terminal fiber to the axon trigger zone - that part of the 1° afferent axon
containing voltage-sensitive sodium and potassium channels (see Figure 2.3B). If the depolarization reaches threshold at these
voltage-sensitive sites, action potentials are generated by the 1° afferent peripheral axon. When the action potentials reach the
central terminals of the 1° afferent, they initiate the release neurotransmitters on 2° afferents within spinal cord or brain stem
nuclei. If, as in the example in Figure 2.8, the generator potential is slowly adapting, the 1° afferent produces a sustained discharge
of action potentials that continue for the duration of the stimulus.
Figure 2.8
Stretching the Ruffini corpuscle produces a
slowly adapting (sustained) generator
potential in the 1° afferent terminal that
degrades slowly for the duration of the
stretch. If the force applied to the 1°
afferent terminal produces a generator
potential that is of sufficient amplitude at
the axon trigger zone, a train of action
potentials is generated that travel along
the axon to the terminals of the its central
process. The action potentials in the
central terminals initiate the release of
neurotransmitters on 2° somatosensory
afferent neurons within the central
nervous system, which results in a
discharge of the 2° afferent.
If the generator potential is rapidly adapting (Figure 2.9), the 1° afferent produces a transient, short burst of action potentials and
falls silent even in the continued presence of the stimulus.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter02.html 6/16

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Systems (Section 2, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department o…
Figure 2.9
Bending a hair produces a
rapidly adapting discharge
of action potentials in the
1° afferent axon that does
not last the duration of the
bending force. If the force
applied to the 1° afferent
terminal produces a
generator potential that is
of sufficient amplitude at
the axon trigger zone, one
or more action potentials
are generated that travel to
the terminals of the 1°
afferent central process.
The action potentials in the
central terminals initiate
the release of
neurotransmitters on 2°
somatosensory afferent
neurons within the central
nervous system. The 1°
afferent axon response is
rapidly adapting and action
potentials are only
generated when the hair is
bent.
The rapidly adapting receptors produce generator potentials and action potential discharges that follow the time-varying waveform
of pressure changes produced by a vibrating stimulus (Figure 2.10, left panel). In contrast, the slowing adapting receptors produce
generator potentials and action potential discharges that are sustained and unable to mimic the time-varying pattern of the
stimulus (Figure 2.10, right panel). Consequently, the responses of rapidly adapting 1° afferents are best suited for representing
time varying (e.g., vibrating or moving) stimuli, whereas slowly adapting 1° afferents better represent static stimuli (e.g., sustained
pressure).
Figure 2.10
At the TOP of this figure, two 1°
somatosensory neurons are
illustrated; each in contact with a
mechanical force (A), a recording
electrode in the somatosensory
receptor (B), and a recording
electrode in the axon (C). BELOW
The responses of the
somatosensory 1° afferents to
stimulation of the receptor with a
vibrating stimulus are illustrated for
rapidly adapting afferents (LEFT
panel) and slowly adapting
afferents (RIGHT panel). The time
course of the applied force or skin
displacement (A); generator
potential recorded in the receptor
(B); and the action potentials
recorded from the afferent axon are
illustrated (C). Notice that the
Pacinian and Meissner corpuscles
and their 1° afferent responses are
best suited to transduce and
transmit information about time-
varying (vibrating or moving)
mechanical stimuli.
2.4 Somatosensory Receptor Types
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter02.html 7/16

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Systems (Section 2, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department o…
Figure 2.11
The locations of cutaneous receptors. Click on the somatosensory receptor
name (in green shaded area) to view a detailed drawing of the receptor. The
location of the receptor will be circled in the larger drawing of the skin.
Cutaneous Receptors
Some of the somatosensory receptors in skin (i.e., the cutaneous receptors) are classified as encapsulated receptors as the 1°
afferent terminal and surrounding cutaneous tissue are encapsulated by a thin sheath (Table II). The encapsulated cutaneous
receptors include Meissner corpuscles, Pacinian corpuscles and Ruffini corpuscles (See Figure 2.11). Other cutaneous receptors are
unencapsulated and include the hair follicle receptor (the 1° afferent ends on hair follicles) and the Merkel complex (the 1° afferent
ends at the base of a specialized receptor cell called the Merkel cell). The sensory receptors of the crude touch, pain and
temperature senses are bare or free nerve endings. That is, they are unencapsulated, do not end on or near specialized tissue, and
may be mechanoreceptors, nociceptors or thermoreceptors.
As was noted earlier, the sensitivity (modality specificity) of the somatosensory receptor is determined by its location and by the
structure of the non-neural tissue surrounding the 1° afferent terminal. The following describes the most commonly observed
cutaneous receptors.
Meissner Corpuscle. The Meissner corpuscle is found in glabrous (i.e., hairless) skin, within the dermal papillae (Figure 2.11).
It consists of an elongated, encapsulated stack of flattened epithelial (laminar) cells with 1° afferent terminal fibers interdigitated
between the cells (Figure 2.12).
Figure 2.12
The Meissner
corpuscle consists of
an encapsulated stack
of flattened epithelial
(laminar) cells with 1°
afferent terminals
interdigitated
between these cells.
The Meissner
corpuscle is located
within the dermal
papilla, near the
surface of the skin,
with its long axis
perpendicular to the
skin surface.
A force applied to non-hairy skin (Figure 2.13) causes the laminar cells in the Meissner corpuscle to slide past one another, which
distorts the membranes of the axon terminals located between these cells. If the force is maintained, the laminar cells remain in a
fixed, albeit, displaced position, and the shearing force on the axon terminals' membranes disappears. Consequently, the 1°
afferent axons produce a transient, rapidly adapting response to a sustained mechanical stimulus.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter02.html 8/16

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Systems (Section 2, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department o…
Figure 2.13
When a force is applied to the dermal
papilla containing the Meissner corpuscle,
the laminar cells in the corpuscle slide
past one another. This shearing force
distorts the membranes of the axon
terminals located between the laminar
cells, which depolarizes the axon
terminals. If the force is sustained on the
dermal papilla, the laminar cells remain in
their displaced positions and no longer
produce a shearing force on the axon
terminals. Consequently, a sustained
force on the dermal papilla is transformed
into a transient force on the axon
terminals of the Meissner corpuscle. The
1° afferent axon response of a Meissner
corpuscle is rapidly adapting and action
potentials are only generated when the
force is first applied.
The Meissner 1° afferent discharges "follow" low frequency vibrating (30 -50 Hz) stimuli, which produces the sensation of "flutter"
(Figure 2.10, left panel). Because a single 1° afferent axon forms many, dispersed (3-4 mm) Meissner corpuscles, the 1° afferent
can detect and signal small movements across the skin. Stimulation of a sequence of Meissner corpuscles have been described to
produce the perception of localized movement along the skin.
Consequently, Meissner corpuscles are considered to be the discriminative touch system's flutter and movement detecting receptors
in non-hairy skin.
Pacinian Corpuscle. Pacinian corpuscles are found in subcutaneous tissue beneath the dermis (Figure 2.9) and in the
connective tissues of bone, the body wall and body cavity. Therefore, they can be cutaneous, proprioceptive or visceral receptors,
depending on their location.
Figure 2.14
The Pacinian corpuscle consists
of a single, centrally placed 1°
afferent terminal that is
surrounded by concentrically
layered epithelial (laminar) cells
that are all encapsulated within
a sheath. In skin, the Pacinian
corpuscle is located deep in the
subcutaneous adipose tissue.
The Pacinian corpuscle is football-shaped, encapsulated, and contains concentrically layered epithelial (laminar) cells (Figure 2.14).
In cross section, the Pacinian corpuscle looks like a slice of onion, with a single 1° afferent terminal fiber located in its center. The
outer layers of laminar cells contain fluid that is displaced when a force is applied on the corpuscle.
When a force is first applied on the Pacinian corpuscle (Figure 2.15), it initially displaces the laminar cells and distorts the axon
terminal membrane. If the external pressure is maintained on the corpuscle, the displacement of fluid in the outer laminar cells
dissipates the applied force on the axon terminal. Consequently, a sustained force on the corpuscle is transformed into a transient
force on the axon terminal, and the Pacinian corpuscle 1° afferent produces a fast adapting response.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter02.html 9/16

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Systems (Section 2, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department o…
Figure 2.15
When a force is applied to
the tissue overlying the
Pacinian corpuscle (press
PLAY), its outer laminar
cells, which contain fluid,
are displaced and distort
the axon terminal
membrane. If the pressure
is sustained on the
corpuscle, the fluid is
displaced, which
dissipates the applied
force on the axon
terminal. Consequently, a
sustained force on the
Pacinian corpuscle is
transformed into a
transient force on its axon
terminal. The Pacinian
corpuscle 1° afferent axon
response is rapidly
adapting and action
potentials are only
generated when the force
is first applied.
Pacinian corpuscles 1° afferent axons are most sensitive to vibrating stimuli (e.g., a tuning fork vibrating at 100 to 300 Hz, Figure
2.10, left) and unresponsive to steady pressure. The sensation elicited when cutaneous Pacinian corpuscles are stimulated is of
vibration or tickle.
Pacinian corpuscles in skin are considered to be the vibration sensitive receptors of the discriminative touch system.
Ruffini Corpuscle. The Ruffini corpuscles are found deep in the skin (Figure 2.11), as well as in joint ligaments and joint
capsules and can function as cutaneous or proprioceptive receptors depending on their location. The Ruffini corpuscle (Figure 2.16)
is cigar-shaped, encapsulated, and contains longitudinal strands of collagenous fibers that are continuous with the connective tissue
of the skin or joint. Within the capsule, the 1° afferent fiber branches repeatedly and its branches are intertwined with the
encapsulated collagenous fibers.
Figure 2.16
The Ruffini corpuscle
consists of 1° afferent
terminal fibers that are
intertwined with
collagenous fibers and
together with the
collagenous fibers are
encapsulated in a fibrous
sheath. The Ruffini
corpuscles are oriented
parallel to the skin surface
and situated deep within
the dermis.
The Ruffini corpuscles are oriented with their long axes parallel to the surface of the skin and are most sensitive to skin stretch.
Stretching the skin (Figure 2.17) stretches the collagen fibers within the Ruffini corpuscle, which compresses the axon terminals. As
the collagen fibers remain stretched and the axon terminals remain compressed during the skin stretch, the Ruffini corpuscle's 1°
afferent axon produces a sustained slowly adapting discharge to maintained stimuli.
Figure 2.17
When the skin is
stretched, the collagen
fibers in the Ruffini
corpuscles are also
stretched and compress
their 1° afferent
terminals. As the collagen
fibers remain stretched
and the axon terminals
remain compressed
during the skin stretch,
the Ruffini corpuscle 1°
afferent axon produces a
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter02.html 10/16

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Systems (Section 2, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department o…
sustained generator
potential and a slowly
adapting discharge to
maintained stimuli.
Ruffini corpuscles in skin are considered to be skin stretch sensitive receptors of the discriminative touch system. They also work
with the proprioceptors in joints and muscles to indicate the position and movement of body parts.
Hair Follicle. The hair follicle receptor is an unencapsulated cutaneous receptor (Figure 2.10). The 1° afferent terminal axons
spiral around the hair follicle base or run parallel to the hair shaft forming a lattice-like pattern (Figure 2.18).
Figure 2.18
The hair follicle 1°
afferent terminal
fibers enter the
follicle to encircle or
to form a lattice
pattern around the
hair shaft.
Most hair follicle 1° afferents are the fast-adapting type; displacement of the hair produces a transient discharge of action
potentials at the onset of the displacement and a maintained displacement of the hair often fails to produce a sustained discharge
(Figure 2.19). The hair follicle afferents respond best to moving objects and signal the direction and velocity of the movement of a
stimulus brushing against hairy skin.
Figure 2.19
Bending a hair produces a
transient force on the hair
follicle base as the entire
follicle is displaced by the
bending force. The 1°
afferent terminal may
produce a rapidly adapting
generator potential and the
1° afferent axon a transient
discharge of action
potentials — even to
sustained bending of the
hair.
As Meissner corpuscles are absent from hairy skin, the hair follicle endings are considered to be the discriminative touch system's
movement sensitive receptors in hairy skin.
Merkel Complex. The Merkel complex is found in both hairy and non-hairy skin and is located in the basal layer of the
epidermis (Figure 2.11). The Merkel complex is unencapsulated and consists of a specialized receptor cell, the Merkel cell, and a 1°
afferent terminal ending, the Merkel disk3 (Figure 2.20). Thick, short, finger-like protrusions of the Merkel cell couple it tightly to
the surrounding tissue. The Merkel cell is a modified epithelial cell, which contains synaptic vesicles that appear to release
neuropeptides that modulate the activity of the 1° afferent terminal. Each 1° afferent axon often innervates only a few Merkel cells
in a discrete patch of skin (Figure 2.18).
Figure 2.20
The Merkel complex
consists of a specialized
Merkel cell, which
contains synaptic vesicles,
and the Merkel disk
ending of a 1° afferent
terminal fiber. A single 1°
afferent axon often
innervates only a few
Merkel cells within a
discrete patch of skin.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter02.html 11/16

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Systems (Section 2, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department o…
A force applied to the skin overlying the Merkel cell distorts it (Figure 2.21), which stimulates its release of a neuropeptide at its
synaptic junctions with the Merkel disk. As the Merkel cell is mechanically coupled to the surrounding skin, it remains distorted for
the duration of the force applied on the overlying skin. Consequently, the Merkel complex 1° afferent axon responds to small forces
applied to a discrete patch of skin with a slowly adapting, sustained discharge.
Figure 2.21
The Merkel cell is
coupled to the
surrounding tissue and
cannot shift its
position relative to the
surrounding tissue.
Consequently, a force
applied to the
overlying skin (press
PLAY), distorts the
Merkel cell for the
duration of the applied
force. The distortion of
the Merkel cell results
in the release of a
stream of
neuropeptides at its
synaptic junctions
with the 1° Merkel
disk. As a result the
action potential
discharges produced
by the Merkel complex
1° afferent is slowly
adapting.
Merkel cells are considered to be the fine tactile receptors of the discriminative touch system that provide cues used to localize
tactile stimuli and to perceive the edges (shape or form) of objects.
Free Nerve Endings. Free nerve endings are found throughout the body, in skin (Figure 2.11), muscles, tendons, joints,
mucous membranes, cornea, body mesentery, the dura, the viscera, etc. The free nerve endings in skin are stimulated by tissue-
damaging (nociceptive) stimuli that produce the sensation of pain or by cooling of the skin or the warming of skin or by touch.
Notice that although all cutaneous free nerve endings appear very similar morphologically, there are different functional types of
free nerve endings, with each responding to specific types of cutaneous stimuli (e.g., nociceptive, cooling, warming or touch).
Free nerve endings are considered to be the somatosensory receptors for pain, temperature and crude touch.
Table II
Cutaneous Receptors
Receptor Type Sensation Signals Adaptation
Meissner Encapsulated
Touch: Flutter & Movement Frequency/Velocity & Direction Rapid
corpuscle & layered
Pacinian Encapsulated
Touch: Vibration Frequency: 100-300 Hz Rapid
corpuscle & layered
Ruffini Encapsulated
Touch: Skin Stretch Direction & Force Slow
corpuscle collagen
Direction &
Hair follicle Unencapsulated Touch: Movement Rapid
Velocity
Merkel Specialized
Touch, Pressure, Form Location & Magnitude Slow
complex epithelial cell
Free Nerve Tissue damage, Contact, or Depends on
Unencapsulated Pain, Touch, or Temperature
Ending Temperature change information carried
2.5 Proprioceptive Receptors
Proprioceptors are located in muscles, tendons, joint ligaments and in joint capsules. There are no specialized sensory receptor cells
for body proprioception4. In skeletal (striated) muscle, there are two types of encapsulated proprioceptors, muscle spindles and
Golgi tendon organs (Figure 2.22), as well as numerous free nerve endings. Within the joints, there are encapsulated endings
similar to those in skin, as well as numerous free nerve endings.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter02.html 12/16

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Systems (Section 2, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department o…
Figure 2.22
A muscle spindle
receptor and Golgi
tendon organ in the
bicep muscle.
Muscle Spindles. Muscle spindles are found in nearly all striated muscles. A muscle spindle is encapsulated and consists of
small muscle fibers, called intrafusal muscle fibers, and afferent and efferent nerve terminals (Figure 2.23).
Figure 2.23
A muscle spindle with its
sensory and motor
innervation. The primary
muscle spindle afferent
terminates as annulospiral
endings in the central area
of the intrafusal muscles
whereas the secondary
muscle spindle afferent
terminates as flower spray
endings in more polar
regions of intrafusal
muscles. The motor
endplates of gamma motor
neurons are located in the
polar regions. The muscle
spindle is attached to the
surrounding extrastriate
muscles and lays with its
long axis in parallel with
the long axes of the
surrounding muscle.
Intrafusal muscles are found exclusively in muscle spindle receptors and are distributed throughout the body among the ordinary
extrafusal muscle fibers of skeletal muscles. The intrafusal fibers are attached to the larger, surrounding extrafusal muscle fibers.
They are oriented in parallel with the extrafusal fibers but do not contribute directly to muscle strength when they contract because
of their small size.
There are two types of afferent terminals in the muscle spindle (Figure 2.23). The annulospiral endings wrap around the central
region of the intrafusal fibers, whereas the flower-spray endings terminate predominantly in more polar regions (away from the
central area) of the intrafusal fibers. The 1° afferents forming the annulospiral endings are called the primary muscle spindle
afferents, whereas those forming the flower-spray endings are called the secondary muscle spindle afferents.
In addition to afferent terminals, the terminals (motor endplates) of gamma motor neurons end on intrafusal muscle fibers. They
will be described in detail in the chapters covering motor systems.
In summary, the muscle spindles are proprioceptors specialized to monitor muscle length (stretch) and signal the rate of change in
muscle length by changing the discharge rate of afferent action potentials. Muscle spindles are most numerous in muscles that
carry out fine movements, such as the extraocular muscles and the intrinsic muscles of the hand. There are fewer spindles in large
muscles that control gross movements of the body (e.g., the muscles of the back).
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter02.html 13/16

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Systems (Section 2, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department o…
Figure 2.24
The Golgi tendon
organ is located
at the junction of
muscle and
tendon. The Golgi
tendon organs
resemble the
Ruffini
corpuscles. That
is, the 1° afferent
terminal fibers
are intertwined
with collagenous
fibers of the
tendon and the
entire organ is
encapsulated in a
fibrous sheath.
Golgi Tendon Organs. Golgi tendon organs are found in the tendons of striated extrafusal muscles near the muscle-tendon
junction (Figure 2.22). Golgi tendon organs resemble Ruffini corpuscles. For example, they are encapsulated and contain
intertwining collagen bundles, which are continuous with the muscle tendon, and fine branches of afferent fibers that weave
between the collagen bundles (Figure 2.24). They are functionally "in series" with striated muscle.
The Golgi tendon organ collagen fibers are continuous with the extrafusal muscle at one end and with the muscle tendon at its
opposite end. Consequently, the mechanical force on the organ is maximal when the extrafusal muscles contract, shorten, and
increase the tension on the tendon. When the muscles contract, the 1° afferent terminals are compressed and remain compressed
as long as the muscle remains contracted. The Golgi tendon organ 1° afferent response to sustained isometric muscle contraction is
slowly adapting, and the 1° afferent generates action potentials as long as the tension is maintained. The responses of the Golgi
tendon organ 1° afferent axon is maximal when the contracted muscle bears a load, e.g., when lifting a heavy object.
The Golgi tendon organ is a proprioceptor that monitors and signals muscle contraction against a force (muscle tension), whereas
the muscle spindle is a proprioceptor that monitors and signals muscle stretch (muscle length).
Joint Receptors. Joint receptors are found within the connective tissue, capsule and ligaments of joints (Figure 2.25). The
encapsulated endings resemble the Ruffini and Pacinian corpuscles and the Golgi tendon organs.
Figure 2.25
The joint receptors are
free nerve endings and
encapsulated endings
in the joint capsule
and joint ligaments.
The encapsulated
receptors in the joint
capsule resemble
Pacinian and Ruffini
endings whereas those
in the ligaments
resemble Golgi tendon
organs.
The joint 1° afferents respond to changes in the angle, direction, and velocity of movement in a joint. The responses are
predominantly rapidly adapting with few joint 1° afferents signaling the resting (static) position of the joint. It has been suggested
that information from muscles, tendons, skin and joints are combined to provide estimates of joint position and movement. For
example, when the hip joint is replaced — removing all joint receptors — the ability to detect the position of the thigh relative to
the pelvis is not lost.
Free Nerve Endings. As mentioned above, free nerve endings of 1° afferents are abundant in muscles, tendons, joints, and
ligaments. These free nerve endings are considered to be the somatosensory receptors for pain resulting from muscle, tendon,
joint, or ligament damage and are not considered to be part of the proprioceptive system.
Table III
Receptor Type Sensation Signals Adaptation
Encapsulated
Rapid initial
annulospiral and Muscle Muscle
Muscle Spindle transient and slow
flower spray stretch length & velocity
sustained
endings
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter02.html 14/16

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Systems (Section 2, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department o…
Muscle: Golgi Encapsulated Muscle
Muscle tension Slow
Tendon Organ collagen contraction
Joint: Encapsulated
Joint Movement Direction & velocity Rapid
Pacinian & layered
Joint: Encapsulated
Joint pressure Pressure & Angle Slow
Ruffini collagen
Joint: Golgi Encapsulated
Joint torque Twisting force Slow
Organ collagen
2.6 Summary
In this chapter, you have learned about somatosensory stimuli and the receptors of three components of the somatosensory
systems. These three components provide accurate information about the location, shape, texture, and movement of tactile stimuli,
(discriminative touch), the position and movement of body parts (proprioception) and the application and location of painful stimuli
(nociception). Tactile and proprioceptive stimuli are the mechanical forces produced when skin contacts external objects
(discriminative touch), limbs oppose the force of gravity (body position) and muscles contract and body parts move. Painful stimuli
are tissue-damaging forces. The sensations produced are those of touch, pressure, flutter, and vibration/movement (discriminative
touch), body position and movement (proprioception), and sharp cutting pain. The discriminative touch receptors are encapsulated
1° afferent terminals (Meissner, Pacinian and Ruffini corpuscles), hair follicle endings and Merkel complexes in skin. The
proprioceptive receptors in muscle are also encapsulated and include the muscle spindle and Golgi tendon organ. The joint
receptors are similar to the encapsulated endings in skin and tendon and are found in the joint capsule and ligaments. The sharp
cutting nociceptors are free nerve endings.
Although it is convenient to subdivide somatosensory receptors and pathways for didactic, clinical and research purposes, it is
important to keep in mind that most somatosensory stimuli act simultaneously and in varying degrees on all somatosensory
receptors in the body part stimulated. For example, placing a heavy, cold object in an outstretched hand produces tactile, thermal,
and proprioceptive sensations that allow us to appreciate the presence (touch, pressure), temperature, and weight of the object
and provide proprioceptive information for finger, wrist and arm adjustments so we do not drop the object.
Test Your Knowledge
Make the best match between the receptor type and the sensation elicited when the receptor is stimulated.
Golgi tendon organ A B C D E
A. Fine touch
B. Vibration
C. Flutter
D. Muscle tension
E. Muscle length
Meissner corpuscle A B C D E
A. Fine touch
B. Vibration
C. Flutter
D. Muscle contractions
E. Muscle length
Merkel complex A B C D E
A. Fine touch
B. Vibration
C. Flutter
D. Muscle contractions
E. Muscle length
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter02.html 15/16

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Somatosensory Systems (Section 2, Chapter 2) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Department o…
Free nerve endings A B C D E
A. Fine touch
B. Vibration
C. Flutter
D. Muscle contractions
E. Pain
Pacinian corpuscle A B C D E
A. Fine touch
B. Vibration
C. Flutter
D. Muscle contractions
E. Muscle length
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter02.html 16/16



IBB 2022
Additional Learning Ressource:
Neuroanatomy
Charles Watson
Matthew Kirkcaldie, Friedrich Schwarz
April 2022

AN INTRODUCTION TO THEANATOMY OF THE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM1 BLOOD SUPPLY TO THE BRAIN 82
Introduction 1 The blood supply to the brain 82
DEVELOPMENT OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 4 THE CIRCULATION OF CEREBROSPINAL FLUID 85
The development of the nervous system 4 The cerebrospinal fluid and its circulation 85
THE SPINAL CORD 14 STAININGAND IMAGING 87
Spinal Cord 14 Staining and imaging - Fundamentals 87
THE BRAIN STEM 22
Brain stem 22
The brain stem cranial nerves 32
The cerebellum 36
DIENCEPHALON 40
The diencephalon 40
HYPOTHALAMUS 42
The hypothalamus 42
Telencephalon 46
The Telencephalon 46
The Broadmann areas of the cortex 51
MOTOR SYSTEMS 53
Motor systems 53
SENSORY SYSTEM 59
The somatosory system 59
The visual system 63
The auditory system 66
The vestibular system 69
Olfaction 73
Taste 77
THEAUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM 79
The autonomic nervous system (ANS) 79

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE ANATOMY OF THE CENTRAL andbalance.Thebrainstemis alsoacorridor throughwhichpathways (tracts)travelfromthe
forebraintothespinalcord,andfromthespinalcordtotheforebrain.Italsocontains centres
NERVOUS SYSTEM
thatsendpathways tokeeptheforebrainawakeandalert.
Introduction
Thebrainstemcanbedividedintotwoparts:thehindbrain(connectedtothespinalcord)and
themidbrain(connectedtotheforebrain).Eachoftheseparts gives risetoimportantexpan-
sions onthedorsalsurface.Thedorsalsurfaceofthehindbraingives risetothecerebellum,
This introductionis avery brief summaryof theparts ofthecentralnervous systemandtheir andthedorsalsurfaceofthemidbraingives risetotwopairs ofbumps –thesuperiorandinfe-
functions.Youmayfindithelpfultohavethis basicinformationbeforeyoubeginadetailed rior colliculi.Thesuperiorcolliculiarevisualcentres,andtheinferior colliculiareauditory
studyoftheparts ofthebrain. centres.
Thecentralnervous systemconsists ofthebrainandthespinalcord.Thespinalcordis rela-
Thecerebellum
tivelysimpleinstructure,butthebrainis veryelaborate.Themainparts ofthebrainarethe
As wehavejustnoted,thecerebellumgrows outofthehindbrain.Itis formedfromthetop
brainstem,cerebellum,andforebrain.
endofthehindbrain,justbehindthemidbrain.Thecerebellumis tinyatbirth,butitlearns to
coordinatecomplexmovements duringthenextfiveyears andbeyond.Thecerebellumcon-
Thebrainand spinalcordareconnectedtoparts of thebodybynerves.Thesenerves areboth
tains anenormous number oftinyneurons calledgranulecells involvedinlearningcoordina-
sensoryandmotor.Thereare12pairs of nerves connectedtothebrain(thecranialnerves)and
tion.Almost80%ofalltheneurons inthebrainarefoundinthecerebellum.
32pairs ofnerves connectedtothespinalcord(thespinalnerves).
Theforebrain
Thefunctions ofthecentralnervous systemarearrangedhierarchically,withthesimplest
Theforebrainhas acentralpartthatcontinues thebrainstem,andamassiveoutgrowthon
functions (likestandingandwalking) locatedinthespinalcordandthemostsophisticated
eachsidecalledthecerebralhemisphere.
functions (likethinkingand memory)locatedintheforebrain.Inbetween,thebrainstemis
responsibleforsurvivalfunctions likebreathing,eating,vocalisation,andbalance.Theadvan-
Thalamus andhypothalamus
tageof this hierarchicalarrangementis thatcomplexfunctions arepre-packagedinthebrain
Thesmaller centralpartoftheforebrainis madeupof twomainstructures,thethalamus and
stemandspinalcord;theyactas completefunctionalmodules,readytorespondtocommands
thehypothalamus.Thethalamus receives sensorypathways relatedtotouch,taste,hearing,vi-
fromtheforebrain.
sion,andbalanceandsends this informationtothecerebralhemisphere.Thehypothalamus is
thecentrefor high-levelcontrolofthefunctions thatensurethesurvivaloftheindividualand
Thespinalcord
thespecies.Survivalof theindividualdepends oneatinganddrinkingandbeingabletode-
Inoldertimes,thespinalcordwas picturedas asimplesensoryreceivingstationwithsimple
fenditself,andsurvivalofthespecies depends onreproductionandcareofoffspring.Thehy-
connections tothemuscles andinternalorgans.Thesefacts arestillpartiallytrue,butthey
pothalamus carries outthesefunctions bycontrollingthesurvivalmodules inthebrainstem
onlytellpartofthestory.Forexample,thespinalcord actionmodules cancontrolwhole
andspinalcordandcontrollingtheendocrineandautonomicnervous systems.
movementpatterns,notjustconnections tosinglemuscles.Morethanthat,itcancoordinate
muscleactivityinvolvedin walking,standing,balance,andreachingandgrasping.There-
Thecerebralhemisphere
markablecontrolofthespinalcordcanbeseeninanimals likehorses thatareabletostand
Thecerebralhemisphereconsists ofanoutsidelayercalledthecerebralcortexandanumber
andmovearoundwithinminutes ofbeingbornbecausethesefunctions arealreadypre-pro-
ofdeepneurongroups calledthebasalganglia.Inthehumanbrain,thecerebralcortexunder-
grammedinthespinalcord.
goes massiveexpansion,whichresults indeepfoldingthatforms sulciandgyrionthesur-
face.Thecerebralcortexis subdividedintoabout180distinctareas,butweonlyknow the
Thewiringofthespinalcordenables ittorespondto somesensorysignals inarapidreflex
precisefunctions ofsomeof theseareas.However,wedoknow alotaboutthetotalfunctions
waybeforethebrainis evenawareof thesensorysignal.Aprimeexampleis whenwestepon
ofthecerebralcortexanditis usefultoremembertheseundereightheadings:
somethingsharpwithbarefeet.Thespinalcordcauses thelowerlimbtoflexandpullaway
fromthesharpobject.Atthesametime,itcauses theextensormuscles intheoppositelower
- senses
limbtocontractinorderto stopyoufromoverbalancing.
- actions
- thinking
Thespinalcordis strongly connectedtotheinternalorgans andbloodvessels throughnerves
- memory
thatarecalledautonomic.Autonomicnerves controltheworkings ofbloodvessels andthein-
- communication
ternalorgans liketheintestines andbladder.Someofthesefunctions,butnotall,canbecon-
- emotions
trolledbytheforebrainthroughits connections withthespinalcord.Theautonomicnerves
- sleepandalertness
connectedtothethoracicspinalcordarecalledsympatheticnerves,andthoseconnectedto
- relationship
thesacralspinalcordarecalledparasympatheticnerves.
Eachofthesefunctions canbesubdivided.For example,'senses' includes touch,taste,hear-
Thebrainstem
ing,vision,smell,andbalance,and'thinking' includes planning,decisionmakingandprob-
Thebrainstemconnects thespinalcordwiththeforebrain.Itis thehomeofbasicfunctional
lem-solving.Combinations oftheseeightfunctions givehumans higher-levelskills suchas
systems thatarevitalforsurvival.Theseincludebreathing,chewing,swallowing,vocalisa-
creativity,inventiveness,socialorganisation,andlearning.
tion,facialexpression,andeyemusclecontrol.As wellas thecontroloftheseactions,the
brainstemreceives sensoryinformationrelatedtotaste,hearing,vision,theskinoftheface,
1 2

Thebasalganglia–striatum,pallidum,andamygdala DEVELOPMENT OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
Thecerebralhemisphere's deep(non-cortical) parts includeseveralstructures,sometimes col-
lectivelyreferredtoas thebasalganglia.This termis notentirelysatisfactorybutcanbeused
The development of the nervous system
as ashorthand.Thelargerparts ofthebasalgangliaarethestriatumandpallidum,whichare
involvedininheritedandlearnedmotor functions.Whentheseareas aredamagedduringlate
About14,000genes controlthedevelopmentofthebraininmammals,morethanhalfofthe
pregnancy,thechildmaydevelopcerebralpalsy–acomplexcombinationofmusclestiffness
totalnumberofgenes.Thegenes firstprovidethegeneralinstructions forbuildingconnec-
andinvoluntarymovements.Asmaller memberof thenon-corticalstructures is theamygdala,
tions inthebrain,butlaterorganisetheuniqueconnectionpatterns thatcharacteriseeach
whichplays avitalroleinemotionalresponses (particularlyfear)andsocialgroupbehaviour.
brainregion.
Questions forrepetition
Dorsalandventralspecificationof thecells intheneuraltube
Theembryonicbraindevelops fromastripofectodermalcells thatformtheneuralplate.The
- Whatis thecentralnervous systemconsistingof?
edges oftheneuralplatecurlmediallytojoinandformtheneuraltube,whichencloses the
- How manyspinalnervepairs arethere?
neuralcanal.
- Inwhichpartofthebrainarethemostneurons?
- Whatparts oftheautonomicnervous systemexist?
This series ofdiagrams shows theformation oftheneuraltubefromtheembryonicneural
plate.Under theinfluenceofsecretedfators fromthenotochord,thecells oftheneural
platesinkdown toformagrooveandtheedges ofthegroove(red) join toformtheneural
tube.Theedges of thegrooveformthecells oftheneuralcrest,which migrateawayfrom
theneuraltubetoformganglia,melanocytes,andtheskeleton oftheface.Figurefrom
Sanes etal.2004,courtesyof Dr.Dan Sanes,NewYorkUniversity.
Atthis earlystage,thecells dorsaltotheneuralcanalaredirectedby Wnt andBMP genes to
formthetwoalar plates (whichhandlesensoryfunctions).Incontrast,thecells ventraltothe
centralcanalaredirectedbysonichedgehog(Shh)genes toformthetwobasalplates (which
areorientedtowardmotor functions).
3 4

Attherostralendoftheneuraltube,threeexpansions appear -theforebrain,midbrain and
thehindbrain vesicles.Theforebrain vesicleforms thecerebralhemispheres,thedien-
cephalon,thehypothalamus,endtheeyestalk.Thehindbrain forms theisthmus,the
rhombeencephalon,andthecerebrum.
As theneuraltubeforms fromtheneuralplate,its developmentis influcendbytheexpres-
sion of agenecalledsonichedgehog(Shh).Expression ofShh in thenotochordinduces
Theprimarydivisionintheneuraltubeis theseparationof theforebrainandmidbrainonthe
thedevelopmentoftheventralstructures (such as motor neurons)in theneuraltube.The
onehandandfromthehindbrainontheother.This separationis definedbytheexpressionof
dorsoventralpatterningoftheneuraltubeis created bytheopposinginfluences odShh
Otx2intheforebrainandmidbrainandtheexpressionofGbx2intherostralhindbrain.The
(ventrally) andBMB andWntgenes (dorsally).FigurefromSanes etal.2004,courtesyof
expressionpatternofOtx2has ledtotheproposalthatthemidbrainsegments bedeclaredpart
Dr.Dan Sanes,NewYork University.
oftheforebrain.
As theneuraltubecloses,ascatteringofcells breaks awayfromthedorsalsidetoformthe
neuralcrest,whichgives risetotheperipheralnervous system,melanocytes,bones andmus-
cles of theface. Hypothalamicsegments andtheformationofthetelencephalicvesicleandtheopticvesicle
Thefiveforebrainsegments consistoftheterminalhypothalamus (hy2),thepeduncularhypo-
thalamus (hy1),andthreediencephalicsegments calledprosomeres (p1,p2,andp3).Theter-
Brainvesicles
minalhypothalamicsegment(hy2)is therostralendoftheneuraltube.Itgives risetothete-
As cells divide,therostralendofthetubedevelops threeswellings calledtheforebrain,mid-
lencephalic(cerebral)vesicles dorsallyandtheopticvesicles rostrally,as wellas theposterior
brain,andhindbrainvesicles.Thecentralpartof theforebrainvesiclegives risetotwoexten-
lobeofthepituitary(neurohypophysis).
sions,thelateralvesicles,subsequentlyformingthecerebralhemispheres.Theroofofthe
Thetelencephalicvesicleis layered:thesurfacelayer is thepallium,andbeneathis thesub-
midbrainvesicle(thetectum) gives risetofour swellings thatgoontoformthesuperiorand
pallium,whichsplits intofourdivisions –thestriatum,pallidum,thediagonaldomain,and
inferiorcolliculi.Theroofof therostralpartof thehindbrainvesicleforms thecerebellum.
thepreopticarea.
Thesmallgroupofembryoniccells thatforms theneuraltubequicklymultiplyandspecialise
toformspecificfunctionalcentres inthebrain.Themultiplicationrateis extraordinaryand Diencephalicsegments
thefew hundredcells intheprimitivehumanneuraltubeeventuallygenerateover80billion Thethreediencephalicsegments,fromrostraltocaudal,areprosomere1(mainlytheprethala-
nervecells.Duringthefirsttwoyears of life,therearetimes whenupto250,000new cells are mus),prosomere2(mainlythethalamus),andprosomere3(mainlythepretectalarea).The
generatedeveryminute. pinealglandgrows dorsallyfromp2,andtheposteriorcommissureis foundinp3.Although
thediencephalonforms caudallytothehypothalamus,theneuraxis becomes sharplyflexed
duringdevelopment,pushingthehypothalamus intoafinalventralpositionunderthepretha-
Segmentationinthebrain
lamus.This gavetheimpressionthatthehypothalamus was aventralcomponentofthedien-
Towards theendofthenineteenthcentury,severalembryologicalstudies foundevidenceof
cephalon,as itwas wronglyassumedinanolderconceptthereof,includingthethalamus.
segmentalsubdivisions inthebrain,whichOrr (1987)calledneuromeres.Unfortunately,the
conceptofbrainsegmentationwas largelyignoredfor thenexthundredyears,beforebeing
spectacularlyconfirmedbythenew scienceof geneexpressioninthedevelopingbrain,fol- Midbrainsegments
lowingthediscoveryofgenetargetinginmicebyMarioCapecchi(1989).Sincethen,many Themidbrainconsists ofalargerostralsegment(m1)andamuchsmallercaudalsegment
studies ofgeneexpressioninthedevelopingvertebratebrainhaveconfirmedthatthebrainis (m2).Thedorsalsurfaceofm1forms thesuperior colliculus andinferior colliculus oneach
madeupof aseries ofdistinctneuromeres (Puelles etal.,2013;Watsonetal.,2017b):fivein side.Inthepast,thepretectalsegmentof thediencephalon(includingtheposteriorcommis-
theforebrain,twointhemidbrain,andtwelveinthehindbrain.Eachsegmentis madeupof sure)was mistakenlythoughttobelongtothemidbrain.Additionally,thefirstsegmentofthe
alarandbasalcomponents aroundtheneuralcanal. hindbrain,theisthmus,was alsomistakenlythoughttobelongtothemidbrain,butgeneex-
5 6

pressionproves itis not.Thesharpbendof theneuraxis atthelevelofthemidbrain(the
cephalicflexure)results fromtheunder-developmentoftheventralsurfacebutleaves thedor-
salsurfaceintact.This creates aheart-shapedprofileinsagittalsections.
Hindbrainsegments
Thehindbrainis madeupoftheisthmus andelevenrhombomeres (r1tor11).Inoldertext-
books,theisthmus,whichcontains thetrochlearnucleus,was sometimes calledrhombomere
zero(r0).Thedorsalparts oftheisthmus andrhombomere1giverisetothecerebellum.The
pontinenucleiareformedontheventralsurfaceofrhombomeres 3and4.
This is adiagramofan adultrodentbrain showingtheposition ofthesegments ofthe
hindbrain.Theembryonichindbarin contains twelvecompartments fromrostraltocaudal.
Thefirstcompartment,adjacenttothemidbrain is calledtheisthmus.Theremaining
eleven compartments arecalledrhombomeres.Rhombomeres 2to11aredefinedbytheex-
pression ofdifferenthoxgenes.Theisthmus is definedbytheexpression offgf8.Thecere-
bellumis formedbyextensions oftheisthmus andthefirstrhombomere.
Thegenes responsibleforcreatingthemajorityof therhombomeres (r2tor11)arethehome-
obox(hox)genes.Thehoxgenes,discoveredinitiallyindevelopinginsects,arealsouniver-
sallyimportantfornervous systemdevelopmentinvertebrates.Thefirstfour hoxgroups
(hox1-hox4)areexpressedinthehindbrain,and hox5-hox13 areexpressedinthespinalcord,
trunk,limbs,andtail.
Thehoxgenes arenotexpressedintheisthmus andinthefirstrhombomere,whichinsteadex-
press Gbx2,furthersubdividedby Fgf8 expressionintheisthmus. This is aphotograph ofasagittalsection of amouseembryo(E13.5) with an overlayshow-
Theneuralcanalofthehindbrainopens updorsallytoformthefourthventricle,withathick- ingthesubdivions ofthedevelopningnervous system.Theimageis taken fromtherefer-
enedlateralmargincalledtherhombiclip. enceatrlas developedbyLuis Puelles as partoftheAllen DevelopingMouseBrainAtlas
createdbytheAllen Institutefor Brain Science.
Flexionoftheneuraltube
Lackofappreciationof thesignificanceofthecephalicflexurehas ledtotragicmisinterpreta-
As mentionedabove,theneuraltubedoes notremainstraightduringdevelopment.Becauseof
tionoftherelationships betweenparts oftheforebrain,particularlythebeliefthatthehypo-
differentialdorsalandventralgrowthinsomeareas,thetubeformingthebrainis forcedinto
thalamus is simplysomekindofventraladditiontothethalamus.
flexionattwopoints.Themostsignificantof theseis thecephalicflexureinthemidbrainre-
gion.Itis soseverethatitcreates almosta180-degreebendintheneuraxis andpushes thehy-
Regionalisationinthespinalcord
pothalamus ventraltothediencephalon.Asecond,less severeflexionis foundinthehind-
Thespinalcordis traditionallydividedintoanumberof segments relatedtotheemergenceof
brain.
individualspinalnerves.Thepresenceofavertebrabetweeneachpairofspinalnerves gives
theimpressionthatthespinalcordis asegmentedstructure,butthis is anillusion,andthe
roots ofthespinalnerves runinacontinuous stripalongthecordinsidethevertebralcanal.
Ontheother hand,thereis clearevidencefromanatomicaland hoxgeneexpressionstudies
thatthespinalcordoffour-limbedvertebrates canbedividedintosixdistinctfunctionalre-
gions -prebrachial(C1-C4),brachial(C5-T1),postbrachial((T2-L1),crural(L2-S1),postcru-
ral(S2-S4),andcaudal(S5-Co2).Thebrachialandcruralregions containthemotorneurons
7 8

thatsupplythelimbmuscles oftheupperandlower limbs,respectively.Thepostbrachialand Formationofsynapses
postcruralparts containthepreganglionicneurons of thesympatheticandspinalparasympa- Developingneurons sproutthinoutgrowths calledprocesses,whichconnectwithothernerve
theticsystems,respectively.Theprebrachialregioncontains themotorneurons supplyingthe cells ormusclecells.Theconnections theymake,generallybetweenanaxonprocess onthe
cervicalmuscles,andthecaudalregioncontains motorneurons supplyingthetailmuscles. sendingsideandadendriteprocess onthereceivingside,arecalledsynapses.Muchoftheba-
sicwiringofthebrainstemandspinalcordis laiddownearlyinfetaldevelopment.These
Neuralcrest earlyconnections arethoserequiredforsurvivalas theycontrolbreathingandswallowing.
Justaftertheclosureoftheneuraltube,agroupof cells migrates awayfromthedorsalsurface Thereis noroomfor errorhere,andthesevitalconnections areformedaccordingtoastrict
oftheneuraltubetoformacolumnoneither side,calledtheneuralcrest.Theneuralcrest program.Thefirstmovements ofthefetus earlyinpregnancyinhumans areclearevidenceof
cells giverisetobothneurons (theganglioncells of theautonomicnervous systemandthe theformationofearlyconnections betweenneurons andmusclecells.Inmice,theconnec-
sensorydorsalrootganglioncells of cranialandspinalnerves)andnon-neuralelements such tions withmuscles aremadeafteronly12days ofembryonicdevelopment,buttheseconnec-
as themelanocytes oftheskinand(surprisingly)thebones andmuscles oftheface.The tions arenotmadeuntilabout12weeks inhumans.
melanocytes migratelongdistances toreachallareas oftheskinsurface. Thesecondcategoryofconnections starts lateinfetaldevelopmentandextends intochild-
hoodandadultlife.Theselaterconnections areless rigidlyprogrammed,andtheyaremade
whilethenewbornmammalinteracts withits environmentandis learningnew skills.Thepe-
Developmentoftheperipheralnervous system
riodinwhichthis typeofplasticityis mostactiveis termedthe"sensitiveperiod" forsensory
Theperipheralnervous systemis madeupofthreecomponents –theaxons ofmotorneurons
andmotorsystems andincludes ashorter"criticalperiod" duringwhichthefundamentalor-
thatconnecttomuscles,thedorsalrootganglioncells andtheirlongaxons,whichreachsen-
ganisationis determined.Itwas formerlybelievedthattheformationofnew connections
soryreceptors,andthegangliaandpostganglionicaxons ofthesympatheticandparasympa-
stoppedsometimesoonafterbirth,butitis now knownthatnew connections areanormal
theticganglioncells.Itis importanttonotethattheopticandolfactorynerves arenotpartof
partofthegrowthofallbrains throughoutlife.Theabilityofthebraintoconstantlyformnew
theperipheralnervous systemsincetheyaredirectoutgrowths oftheforebrain,withmyelin
connections andtoreshapepatterns of connectioninresponsetonew informationis referred
producedbyoligodendrocytes insteadofSchwanncells.
toas plasticity.Theplasticityofthehumanbrainis remarkable.Ithas beenestimatedthatthe
Theelements oftheperipheralnervous systemareprimarilydistributedbycranialnerves 3-12
brainforms anaverageof amillionnew connections perminutethroughoutthewholeoflife.
andbythespinalnerves.Inbothcranialandspinalnerves,theaxons ofmotorneurons grow
outuntiltheyreachtheirtargetmuscle.
Axonguidance
Anaxonthatgrows outfromaneuronwillonlybefunctionallysuccessfulifitconnects with
Adultneurogenesis
thecorrecttargetcell.Themechanismthathelps itfindits correcttargetis calledaxonguid-
Someparts ofthematuremammalianbrain,notablythehippocampus,thecerebellum,andthe
ance,oraxonpathfinding.Manygrowingaxons havebeenfoundtobeextraordinarilyaccu-
olfactorybulb,canactuallygeneratenew neurons.Inmostotherareas ofthebrain,itseems
rateinfindingtherightpathtotheirtarget.Insomecases,theaxons neurons findtheirproper
neuroplasticityappears tobesolelytheresultof themassivereorganisationofsynapticnet-
partnerbecausetheysticktomatchingmolecules onthesurfaceofotheraxons orhaverecep-
works inresponsetonew demands.
tors sensitivetomolecules madebytheirtargets,whicharebothcontrolledbyacommon
gene.Forexample,motorneuronclusters inthespinalcordandthemusclegrouptowhich
Migrationofneurons
theyconnecthavebeenshowntoshareaspecificgenemarker.Axonguidanceworks bya
Inmanyparts ofthebrain, neurons continuetodevelopintheplacewheretheywerefirst
process ofstepwiserefinement:First,thegrowingaxonfollows ageneralpathway,bundling
formed.Theseneurons maysendtheir axons toother areas inthebrain,buttheneuronalcell
withsimilaraxons andobeyinggeneralroutingcues (towhichitmayormaynotbesensitive)
bodies donotmove.However,inafew places inthebrain,groups ofneurons migratefrom
suchas crossingthemidline.Thenuponnearingits destination,itdetects morespecificchem-
theirplaceofbirthtoreachtheirfinallocation.Inthecerebralcortex,mostneurons aregener-
icalsignals fromits target.Agenepairingsystemlikethis,encodingattractantmolecules and
atedatthesurfaceoftheventricleandmigrateoutwardtofindthecorticallayerinwhichthey
thereceptors whichrespondtothem,alsoexists inthehindbrainneurongroups thatconnect
willfinallyreside.Mostoftheneurons thatmigratetowardthesurfaceofthebrain(radialmi-
toparticularcells inthecerebellum.
gration) arethefuturepyramidalandstellateneurons ofthecortex,bothofwhichareexcita-
Whatever themechanisms,theformationofearlyconnections is remarkablyaccurateandreli-
toryglutamatergicneurons.Ontheotherhand,thesmallGABAergicinhibitoryneurons of
able,sothatbrains arealways initiallywiredupinthesameway.Thegrowingaxon's tipis a
thecortexariseinthebaseof theforebrainandmigratetangentiallytoreachtheirfinalsettle-
veryactiveenlargedareacalledagrowthcone.Thegrowthconeis ahighlymobilestructure
mentinthecortex,sothefinalstructureis theproductoflargemigrations movingatrightan-
thatappears tofeelits waythroughtissue,detectingveryfaintchemicalsignals thatleaditto-
gles toeachother.TheGABAneurons constitute20% ofthecorticalneurons inmammals.
wards its targets orwhichsteeritawayfromunwantedconnections.Thesigns maybefixedin
Thelargestmigrationofneurons inthebrainbegins intherostralpartoftherhombiclip,
place,likesignposts,ormaybedistributedover longdistances,likethebreadcrumbs leftbe-
whichborders therostralendof thefourthventricleofthehindbrain.Mostoftherhombiclip
hindbyHanselandGretel.
cells migratedorsallyintothedevelopingcerebellum,whilesmallernumbers migrateven-
trallyintothelongitudinalpartofthehindbrain.Thosethatmigrateintothecerebellumform
thetinygranulecells thateventuallymakeup70% ofalltheneurons inthebrain.Becauseof
this,therhombiclipis now recognisedas themostactivecellgenerationareainthedevelop-
ingnervous system.
Thewidedispersalofneurons andmelanocytes fromtheneuralcrestconstitutes anotherma-
jorneuralmigrationduring development.Theprocess bywhichthecrestcells detachand
movethroughtissueinvolves manygenes,someof whichareimplicatedincancermetastasis.
9 10

damagetothefetalbrain.Itis possiblethatviralinfections mayalsocausecerebralpalsydur-
ingpregnancy.
Neuraltubedefects (NTD),themostcommonofwhichis calledspinabifida,arecausedbya
disruptionoftheveryearlydevelopmentoftheneuraltube,withincompleteclosureatthe
rostraland/or caudalends.Themostcommonplaceforincompleteclosureis inthecaudal
partofthespinalcord,andinthemostseverecases,thedamagetothespinalcordresults in
paralysis ofthelowerlimbandloss of controlofthebladder andbowel.Somefamilies havea
geneticpredispositiontoNTD,butthemostcriticalfactor is alackof thevitaminfolate.
Sincetheriskperiodoccurs beforeapparentsigns of pregnancy,allwomenwhomightbe-
comepregnantshouldmakesurethattheir folateintakeis high–eitherbyeatingleafyvegeta-
bles andotherfolate-richfoods orbytakingfolatevitamintablets as wellasupplement.In
manycountries,breadflourandbreakfastcereals areenrichedwithfolatetoensurethatthe
wholepopulationhas adequatefolatelevels.
Agrowth coneatthetipofan axon fromaratdorsalrootganglion neuron in cellculture. Alcoholconsumptionbywomeninthefirsteightweeks ofpregnancycanhavedevastating
Stainingfor actin (green)outlines theflattenedlamellipodium,with numerous finefilopo- effects onearlybraindevelopment,andthechildmaybebornwithsignificantdeficiencies in
diaextendingtoexploretheenvironmet.Microtubules (red)filltheaxon andextendinto brainfunction.Theconditionis calledfetalalcoholsyndrome.
thecentrallamellipodium,thesiteof activegrowth.In vivo,thegrowth conewouldhavea Withinthefirstthreemonths ofpregnancy,rubellainfection(Germanmeasles)cancausema-
three-dimensionalruffledshape.Imagecourtesyof MichaelThompson andDr.LisaFoa, jorbrainabnormalities,includingdeafness andblindness.
UniversityofTasmania,Australia. IntheWest,itis notwidelyappreciatedthatiodinedeficiencyduringfetaldevelopmentis the
mostimportantcauseofintellectualdisabilityworldwide.Butitis stillaffectingmillions of
Atthestagewhenneurons arematuringandsendingoutaxons tomakecontactwithother childreninmountainous areas ofAsia,SoutheastAsia,andsouth-easternAustralia,whereio-
neurons,thedevelopingnervous systemsecretes atapestryofguidancemolecules thatattract dinehas beenleechedoutofthesoil.Iodinedeficiencyresults inhypothyroidismthatperma-
andrepel,definingpathways,markingcrossingpoints,andidentifyingdestinations.Growing nentlydamages thedevelopingbrainbyaffectingkeygenes forconnectivity.Theproblemof
axons explorethis spacewiththeirgrowthcones,respondingtosomecues andignoringoth- iodinedeficiencyis easilyremediedwiththesupplyofiodinesupplements insaltandoil,but
ers,accordingtothereceptors theycarry.Axons fromdiverseregions convergeonshared this is notalways easytoachievebecauseoflogisticimpediments.
pathways andthenbranchouttodistincttargets as theyencounterindividualcues.Several
guidancemolecules havebeenidentified,andtheir functions havebeenanalysedindetail; Criticalperiods duringpostnataldevelopment
theyincludenetrins,semaphorins,andSlitproteins.Oncetheyreachtheirtargets,axons stop Morethansixtyyears ago,itwas shownthatkittens thathadoneeyekeptclosedduringapar-
growingbecausetheyencounter cellsurfacemolecules thatturnoffgrowthandstimulate ticularperiodafter birthwereunabletodevelopbinocular visionsubsequently.This ledtoa
synapticformation. theorythatonemustreceiveaspecificsensoryinputwithinalimitedperiodforapartofthe
Thesestopsignals varyinconcentration,soarrivingaxons mayfanoutacross thetargettissue braintodevelopnormally.This concepthadamajorimpactontheories ofpostnataldevelop-
inanorganisedgradient.Inthecaseofephrins andEphreceptors,someaxons willhavefew ment.Inparticular,itraisedserious concerns thatchildrendeprivedof aparticularstimulus or
Ephreceptors,andsomewillhavemany.If theyencounteratissuewithagradientofephrins environmentforashortperiodintheirlifemightbedeprivedforeverofsomevitalcapability.
expressed,axons withmanyreceptors willstoprespondingtosmallconcentrations ofephrins. However,this view has notbeensupportedbycontemporaryevidence,anditis now feltthat
Incontrast,thosewithfew receptors willpushpastlow-ephrinareas andstopwhenthe theconceptshouldbeappliedmoreloosely.Themodernversionofthis conceptargues that
ephrins becomemoreconcentrated.SincetheEphreceptors andephrins areregulatedbyge- criticalperiods aretheidealtimefor mostchildrentoreceiveaparticularinput.However,it
neticgradients inthetargetandtheoriginoftheaxons respectively,this simplemechanism accepts thatdelayedinputs canstillbeeffective.For this reason,theterm'sensitiveperiods' is
preserves topographicarrangements across longdistances. commonlyusedtodenotelongertimeintervals duringwhichexperiencecanshapethener-
vous system.Sensitiveperiods duringhumanpostnataldevelopmentthathavereceivedpartic-
Synapsepruningandnervecelldeath ularattentionarethoseforlanguageacquisition(mainlyninemonths tofiveyears),develop-
Notallofthesenew connections workas wellas theyshould,andmillions ofsynapses are mentofemotionalcontrol(frombirthtotwoyears),motorcontrol(frombirthtoeightyears),
prunedduringearlybraindevelopmentsothatthematuresystems formedareaccurateandef- andhabitualways ofresponding,suchas enthusiasmandpersistence(fromsixmonths totwo
ficient.Ingeneral,mostsystems follow apatternof beingover-connectedinitially,whichis years).
thenrefinedbypruning,whichcontinues throughoutlife.Thesamepruningprocess is applied
toneurons:manyarekilled off duringdevelopment,specificallythosethathavemadepoor Laterprocesses thatrefinethestructureofthebrain
connections orareotherwiseunnecessary.Thesewaves ofsynapticpruningandneuronal Thedevelopmentofthebraindoes notstopinchildhood.As notedabove,theformationof
deatharepartoftheprocess ofbuildinganefficientnervous system.As withsynapses,the new synapses continues throughoutlife.Inthecerebralcortex,this is accompaniedbythe
pruningof cells andaxonbranches continues throughoutlife. continuedgrowthofdendrites.Frombirthtoadulthood,themass ofthecortexincreases five-
foldwithoutanynew cells forming–anincreasealmostentirelyduetodendritegrowth.It
Criticalperiods infetaldevelopment has beenshownthatthereis amarkedincreaseinnew synapsegrowthinthefrontallobes
Certaindevelopmentalinsults cancausedevastatingdamagetothedevelopingbrainand duringadolescencesothatthefrontallobes arenotfullymatureuntilabout25years ofage.
spinalcord.Theseincludevitamindeficiency(neuraltubedefect),alcohol(fetalalcoholsyn- Anothervitalprocess thatoccurs duringchildhoodandadolescenceis thatofprogressive
drome),iodinedeficiency,andinfections (rubella).Eachoneofthesecancausewidespread myelination.Myelinsheaths arelaiddownduringthepostnatalyears untilearlyadulthood.
Myelinationincreases thespeedoftransmissionofactionpotentials alongaxons.This might
11 12

provideamechanismforstabilisingconnectiontimes whilethebodyenlarges.Thedistance THE SPINAL CORD
fromthespinalcordtothefootmuscles increases fromabout300mminababytoabout1000
mminanadult;ifmyelinationdidnotoccur,itcould takethirtytimes as longforacommand
Spinal Cord
toreachthemuscles inanadult.
Thedevelopmentofthecerebellumis delayedcomparedwithotherparts ofthebrain.Atthe
timeof birth,thecerebellumis extremelysmall,butduringthefirstsixyears oflifeinhu-
Thecentralnervous systemconsists oftheforebrain,brainstem,andspinalcord.Thefore-
mans,itgrows tothesizeofanorange.Thecerebellum's roleis toassistwiththecoordination
brainis comprisedofthecerebralhemispheres,olfactorystructures,hypothalamus,anddien-
ofmovement,soits developmentis delayedsothatitmatches theperiodwhenthechildis
cephalon.Thebrainstemconsists ofthemidbrain(mesencephalon) andthehindbrain
learningnew motorskills.
(rhombencephalon),comprising12segments.
Thespinalcordis thesimplestpartof thecentralnervous systemcontaining:
Neuralplasticity
Neuralplasticityrefers totheabilityofthematurebraintochangeitselfbygeneratingnew
- sensoryneurons thatreceivesensationfromthesensoryreceptors
neurons orbymakingnew connections.Therealisationthatthebraincancontinuallychange
- motorneurons thatcontrolmuscles
itself is quitenew;ithas ledtosignificantchanges inneurosciencethinking.Inthepast,itwas
- longtracts connectingthespinalcordwiththebrain
thoughtthatthestructureof thematuremammalianbraincouldnotbechangedsothatsome-
- thepreganglionicnucleioftheautonomicnervous system
onewhosufferedastroke, orsomeotherformofbraininjurywouldbecondemnedtoaper-
- patterngenerators forcomplexmovements suchas runningatdifferentspeeds
manentloss offunction.However,since1990ithas becomeevidentthatthebraincancom-
pensatebycreatingmajorchanges inconnections afterinjury,andmanyrehabilitationpro-
Thespinalcordis alongcylindricalstructureextendingfromthebaseoftheskulltothefirst
grams havebeendevelopedtotakeadvantageof this capacity.
lumbarvertebrainthehuman.Thespinalcordis noticeablythickerintheregions thatare
Theabilityto grow andmakenew connections is notrestrictedtoinjuredbrains -italsooc-
connectedtotheupperandlower limb.
curs innormalbrains asked tocopewithlargeamounts ofnew information.Forexample,an
MRI studyofthebrains of final-year medicalstudents foundthatthegreymatterintheirpari-
etalcortexandhippocampus increasedsubstantiallyin theperiodleadinguptotheirfinalex-
ams.
Apioneerintheareaofneuroplasticity,MikeMerzenich,has promotedtheideathatexercis-
ingthebraincanincreaseits capacityas adefenceagainstcognitivedeteriorationinelderly
individuals.
Questions forrepetition
- How manygenes areinvolvedinthedevelopmentofthemammalianbrain?
- How long does thematurationof thefrontalcortextake?
- Inwhichbrainareas does adultneurogenesis takeplacetoanynotableextent?
- Whatarethecomponents oftheperipheralnervous system?
- Whatarethenamesofthesignallingmoleculesthatorientventrallyordorsallyoftheneural
tube?
- WherearethefirstfourHoxgenes expressed?
- Whatis oneofthemainreasons for neuraltubedefects?
In this photograph ofmousespinalcord,thethickenedregions representtheareas ofat-
tachmentoftheupper andlower limbnerves.
Inatransversesectionofthespinalcord,acentralbutterfly-shapedareaofgreymatteris sur-
roundedbywhitematter.Thegreymatteris dividedintoventralanddorsalhorns,andthe
whitemattercanbedividedintothreefuniculi(columns)–dorsal,lateralandventral.
Thegreymattercanbefurther subdividedintoaseries oflayers calledthelaminaeofRexed.
Layers 1to4formthedorsalhornandarerelatedtosensoryinput.Layers 7to9formthe
ventralhornandhavefunctions generallytothemotor system,whilethelimbandtrunkmotor
neurons arelocatedinlamina9.Inbetweenthedorsalandventralhorns lies thelamina5,
whichis thesiteofpatterngenerators forlimbmovements.Lamina6is smallandis not
presentatalllevels.
13 14

Motorneurons inthespinalcord
Motorneurons initiatemusclefibrecontractionandsecretionof glands,actingas thefinal
commonpathwayformotorfunction's centralandperipheralneuralpathways.Themotorneu-
rons inthespinalcordbelongtotwomajor functionalgroups –somaticandautonomic.So-
maticmotorneurons innervateskeletal(voluntary)musclewhileautonomicmotorneurons in-
nervatesmoothmuscleandglands.
Somaticmotorneurons arelocatedintheventralhornofthegreyofthespinalcordinlamina
9.Thesearelargemultipolar neurons thatstainwellwithacetylcholinesteraseandNeuN
markers.
Schematictransversesection through thespinalcord.
Atransversesection of mammalian spinalcordstainedfor NeuN showingupper limbmo-
tor neurons (MN)in lamina9of theventralhorn.
Thelamina9motorneurons arelargebecausetheyeachsupportaverylongaxonthatruns to
supplythestriatedmuscles oftheaxialskeleton(muscles oftheneck,trunk,andtail)andthe
muscles oftheupperandlower limbs.Themotorneurons innervatingaxialmuscles are
presentatallspinalcordlevels.Still,thelargemotorneurons innervatinglimbmuscles are
Schematictransversesection through thespinalcordshowingimportantlaminae.
onlypresentattheleveloforiginoftheupperlimbnerves (C5toT1spinalcordsegments in
thehuman)andtheleveloforiginofthelowerlimbnerves (L3toS1spinalcordsegments in
Thespinalcordreceives sensoryinformationfromtheskin,joints,andinternalorgans;this
thehuman).
informationis processedlocallyandsenttothebrain.Themotorneurons inthespinalcord
Theautonomicmotorneurons ofthespinalcordcanbedividedintotwoseparategroups–the
connectwiththemuscles,bloodvessels,andinternalorgans andcaninitiateactivityinthese
preganglionicmotorneurons ofthesympatheticnervous systemandthepreganglionicmotor
structures.Thebrainsends nervefibrebundles (tracts)tocontrolthesemotorneurons.
neurons ofthepelvicparasympatheticsystem.
Themammalianspinalcordis madeupof sixdistinctanatomicalandfunctionalregions–one
fortheneck(prebrachial),onefortheforelimb(brachial),oneforthesympatheticoutflow
(postbrachial),oneforthelowerlimb(crural),onefor thepelvicparasympatheticoutflow
(postcrural),andalastonefor thetail(caudal).
Inthehuman,theprebrachialregionextends fromspinalcordsegments C1toC4,thebrachial
regionfromC5toT1,thepostbrachialregionfromT2 toL2,thecruralregionfromL3toS1,
thepostcruralregionfromS2toS4,andthecaudalregionfromS5tothecoccygealsegments.
Thespinalcordcontains sophisticatedpatterngenerators thatcaninitiatedifferentkinds of
coordinatedmovements.Movementpatterns generatedinthespinalcordincludelocomotion,
posture,andbalancing.
15 16

Schematicoverviewof thespinalnerves.
Below thecervicalregion,thereare12thoracicvertebraeand12thoracicspinalnerves,5
lumbarvertebraeand5lumbar spinalnerves,5sacralvertebraeand5sacralspinalnerves.
Thenumberoftail(coccygeal)vertebraevaries fromonetotwo.
In humans,thesympatheticpreganglionicmotor neurons arefoundattheT2toL2spinal Theforelimbmuscles aresuppliedbynerves fromthebrachialplexus,formedbytheC5,C6,
cord,andtheparasympatheticpreganglionicmotor neurons arelocatedfromS2toS4 C7,C8,andT1spinalnerves.Thehindlimbmuscles aresuppliedbythelumbosacralplexus,
spinalcordsegments. formedbytheL2,L3,L4,L5,andS1spinalnerves.
Spinalcordnerveroots Dermatomes
Adorsalandventralrootconnects eachspinalnervetothespinalcord.Theventralrootcon- Eachspinalnervesupplies aspecificstripof skinfromthemiddleofthebacktotheventral
tains theaxons ofmotorneurons,andthedorsalrootcontains sensoryaxons.Thecellbodies midline.Theskinareaprovidedbyasinglespinalnerveis calledadermatome.This diagram
ofthesensory axons arelocatedinthedorsalrootganglion,whichforms aswellingattached shows thedistributionof thespinaldermatomes fromC5toS1.
tothedorsalroot.
Overviewspinalnerveroots.
Thespinalnerves
Thespinalnerves arenamedfor thevertebraadjacenttotheirexit,butthenamingconvention
changes fromcervicaltothoracicandlower levels.Inthecervicalregion,thenerves are Thedermatomes ofthehuman body.
namedfor thevertebralbodybelow theirexitsothatC1exits abovetheC1vertebra,C2
abovetheC2vertebra,andsoon.However,inthethoracicandlowervertebrallevels,the
emergingnerves arenamedforthevertebralbodyabovetheirlevelofexitsothatT1exits be-
low theT1vertebra,T2below theT2vertebra,andsoon.This creates aproblemforthenerve
identityemergingbetween theC7vertebraandtheT1vertebrasinceitdoes notfiteitherof
thesedefinitions.Thesolutionwas tonamethis nervetheC8nerve,eventhoughthereis no
C8vertebra.Theresultis thatthehumanhas 7cervicalvertebraeand8cervicalspinalnerves.
17 18

Spinalcordtracts neuronis adorsalrootganglioncellwithits centralprocess enteringthespinalcordtoascend
forsomedistancebeforeitsynapses withthesecondneuroneinthechain;theaxonofthesec-
Descendingtracts inthespinalcord ondneuroncrosses themidlineimmediatelyandclimbs tothethalamus;thethirdneuron
Descendingtracts ariseinthecerebralcortexandthebrainstem.Mostdescendingtracts cross sends its axonfromthethalamus tothecerebralcortex.
inthebrainstemandthendescendineitherthelateralorventralfuniculus ofthespinalcord.
Thedescendingtracts terminateoninterneurons inlaminae5,6,and7,motorneurons inlam-
ina9,orboth.Infunctionalterms,ausefuldistinctioncanbemadebetweenthedescending
tracts inthelateralfuniculus andthoseintheventralfuniculus:thelateralfuniculus tracts
(corticospinal,rubrospinal,lateralreticulospinal) aremoreconcernedwiththecontrolof
flexormovements andparticularlymovements ofthedistalparts ofthelimbs,whereas thede-
scendingtracts oftheventralfuniculus (vestibulospinal,tectospinal,medialreticulospinal)are
moreconcernedwiththecontrolof extensor(postural)muscles ofthetrunkandproximal
parts ofthelimbs.Thecorticospinaltracttravels fromthemotorcortexthroughtheinternal
capsule,pons,andpyramid toreachthepyramidaldecussation,crossingtotheoppositeside.
Schematicoverviewof sensorypathways.
Itis importanttonotethatthecentralprocess ofthefirstneuroninthespinothalamicsystem
is short(its axonascends foronlyafew spinalcordsegments).However,themainprocess of
thefirstneuronofthedorsalcolumnsystemascends allthewaytothemedullaoblongata.
Thefirstneuronofthespinothalamicsystemascends inthedorsolateralfasciculus (justexter-
naltolamina1),andthecellbodyofthesecondneuronmaylieinlamina1,2,3,or4.
Schematicoverviewofthecoricospinaltract.
Theaxonofthesecondspinothalamicneuroncrosses themidlineintheanteriorwhitecom-
missureof thespinalcord.Itthenascends ineitherthelateralspinothalamicpathway(pain
Theinternalcapsulestripofwhitematter inthecerebralhemisphereis acommonsiteofdam-
andtemperaturesensation)ortheanteriorspinothalamictract(touchsensation).
agetothecorticospinaltractinhumans,whereahaemorrhageorbloodclotcancausea
Thedorsalcolumntracts carrytouch,deeppressure,proprioceptive,andvibrationsenseinfor-
stroke.Aninternalcapsulestrokeresults inparalysis andstiffness inthemuscles oftheoppo-
mationinthegracileandcuneatefasciculi-thegracilefasciculus mainlyconveys information
sitesideof thebody.
fromthehindlimb,andthecuneatefasciculus conveys informationfromtheforelimb.Note
Inprimates,somecorticospinalfibres makedirectcontactwithmotorneurons inlamina9.
thatthesetwopathways donotcross themidlineuntiltheyreachthebrainstem.
Still,directconnections fromthecerebralcortextomotorneurons arerareorabsentinnon–
primatemammals.Thecorticalcontrolof limbmovements innon–primatemammals is
Thespinocerebellar tracts
mainlybasedonamajorprojectiontolamina5inthespinalcord,whichcontains ahighlyor-
Thedorsalspinocerebellarandventralspinocerebellartracts conveypositionsense(proprio-
ganizedsystemoflimbmovementpatterngenerators (Levineetal.,2014).
ception)andtactileinformationtothecerebellum.Thesetracts endonthesamesideas they
Somebrainstemcentres sendtracts tothespinalcord.Thesearetherednucleus (rubrospinal
began.As withtheotherascendingfibresystems,thefirstneuronofthedorsalspinocerebellar
tract),superiorcolliculus (tectospinaltract),vestibularnuclei(vestibulospinaltracts),and
andventralspinocerebellarsystems is adorsalrootganglioncell.Inthecaseofthedorsal
reticular nuclei(reticulospinaltracts).
spinocerebellar system,thefirstneuronends bysynapsingonneurons ofthedorsalnucleus
(thenucleus ofClarke),whichis aprominentcellgroupfoundinthoracicandupperlumbar
Ascendingtracts inthespinalcord
levels (notethatthesearethesamelevels atwhichthepreganglioniccolumnofthesympa-
Boththespinothalamictracts andthedorsalcolumns (gracileandcuneatefasciculi)convey
theticnervous systemis located).Thedorsalnucleus lies justdorsolateraltothecentralcanal.
somatosensoryinformationfromonesideof thebodytothecerebralcortexoftheopposite
Theaxons ofthesecells formthedorsalspinocerebellartractinthelateralfuniculus andend
sideviathethalamus.Eachofthesesystems is basicallyachainofthreeneurons:thefirst
inthecerebellarcortexofthesameside.Theventralspinocerebellarsystemis morecompli-
19 20

catedanatomically,but,in general,itis similartothedorsalspinocerebellarsystemsinceit THE BRAIN STEM
ends inthecerebellumofthesameside.Boththedorsalspinocerebellarandventralspinocere-
bellarsystems serveonlythebody's rearhalf;thebody's fronthalfis servedbyanadditional
Brain stem
spinocerebellarsystemcalledtheexternalcuneatesystem.
Thebrainstemis madeupoftwoparts,themidbrain(mesencephalon)andthehindbrain
(rhombencephalon).Themidbrainis continuous withtheforebrain,andthehindbrainis con-
tinuous withthespinalcord.
Inoldertextbooks,thebrainstemis dividedintothreeparts:midbrain,pons,andmedullaob-
longata.Unfortunately,this schema,basedonanow outdatedview of humanbrainanatomy,
is misleadingandinaccurate.Theconfusionrelates tothemushroom–likeexpansionofthe
pons inthehumanbrainsothatitappears tobeginadjacenttothemidbrainandextendtohalf
thelengthofthehindbrain.Thetruenatureof themammalianpons is explainedintheChap-
teronbrainsegmentation.Inthemeantime,westronglyrecommendthatyouusetheterms
'midbrain' and'hindbrain' tosubdividethebrainstem.
Thebrainstemserves anumberof keyfunctions:
-thecontrolofthemuscles oftheeye,face,mouth,andthroat;controlofthesalivary
andlacrimalglands;
-controloftheinternalorgans ofthethoraxandabdomen;
-receivingsensationfromtheface,mouth,andthroat,includingtaste;
-receivingsensationfromthespecialsenseorgans forvision,hearingandbalance;
-coordinationofmovementof thelimbs andtrunk
-centers forcontrolofbreathing,micturition,anddefecation;
-centers formaintenanceofalertness;
-actingas acorridorforlongmotorandsensorypathways thatconnectthebrainwith
thespinalcord;
-andas aplaceof originof descendingmotorpathways.
Thebrainstemis connectedwiththemuscles andsensoryorgans oftheheadthroughten
pairs ofcranialnerves (cranialnerves 3to12).Thereis aseparatechapterdetailingthe
anatomyandconnections of thebrainstemcranialnerves.
Schematicoverviewofthespinocerebellar tracts.
Thebrainstemhas abasiccylindricalstructure,buttherearemajoroutgrowths fromthedor-
Questions forrepetition
salsurface.Inthemidbrain,thesedorsaloutgrowths arecalledthesuperiorandinferiorcolli-
culi–twopairs ofroundedbumps thatarereceivingcenters forvisualpathways (thesuperior
-Whichlaminaeofthespinalcordaremainlyassociatedwithmotorfunctions?
colliculi)andauditorypathways (theinferiorcolliculi).Thelargeoutgrowthfromthehind-
-Whichbrainareais frequentlyaffectedbystrokes?Whataretheconsequences?
brainis thecerebellum.Duringearlydevelopment,thecerebellumgrows outoftherostral
-Whichneurons constitutethespinalcord?
partofthehindbrain,justcaudaltothemidbrain.
-Whatsensoryinformationis transmittedinthedorsalcolumns ofthespinalcord?
-Fromwhichspinalcordsegments dothepreganglionicsympatheticnerves originate?
21 22

SECTIONSTHROUGHTHECAUDALHINDBRAIN
Thecaudalendofthehumanbrainstemis basicallysimilartosections ofthecervicalspinal
cord.However,aseries ofimportanttractrelocations changes theappearanceas weascend
throughthehindbrain.Themainchanges arethefollowing:
-Therelocationofthecorticospinaltractfromits lateralpositioninthespinalcord
toaventralpositioninthepyramidoftheoppositeside.Thecorticospinaltractis a
descendingtract,butherewearefollowingitinreverse.
Caudalhuman hindbrain atthelevelof thepyramidaldecussation.
-Theterminationofthegracileandcuneatefasciculiinthegracileandcuneate
nuclei–aftersynapsing,this pathwaycontinues bycrossingthemidline(internal
Asagittalsection through thebrain of amarmosetmonkeyshowingthemidbrain andhind-
arcuatefibers)toreachapositiondorsaltothepyramid- thenewlyformedcrossed
brain.Thecerebellumis alargeoutgrowth connectedtothedorsalsurfaceofthehind-
tractis calledthemediallemniscus.Themediallemniscus travels rostrallytoreach
brain.Thetworoundedstructures on thedorsalsurfaceofthemidbrain arethesuperior
thethalamus.
andinferior colliculi.
BRAIN STEM SECTIONS STAINED FORMYELIN
Thenextsectioninvolves theexaminationof images ofhumanbrainstemandtheidentifica-
tionof majorstructures inthesesections.Wewillfirstlookatthemainfeatures ofbrainstem
sections insummaryandthenlookatdetails withineachsection.Thesections shownhereare
stainedtoshow myelinated fibers inordertopresentaclearpictureofthemainpathways in
thebrainstem.Groups ofneurons (nuclei)donotstainandappearas paleareas inthesesec-
tions.
Hindbrain atthelevelofthegracileandcuneatenucleiandthesomatosensorydecussation.
23 24

-Afterall,thegracileandcuneatefibers havesynapsed,andthesecondaxonhas thepontinenucleicross themidlinetoreachthecerebellum.Becausethepontinenucleiare
crossedthemidlinetoreachthemediallemniscus,thedorsalregionofthebrain huge,this crossingforms amassiveoutgrowthontheventralsurfaceof thehindbrain.
stemis progressivelyvacateduntilnothingis left–theremainingspaceis occu- Thefibers travellingfromthehindbraintothecerebellumformtwothickbundles calledthe
piedbythefourthventricle. inferiorandmiddlecerebellarpeduncles.Theinferiorcerebellarpedunclecontains the
crossedolivocerebellarfibers.
Thehindbrain atthelevelofthecaudalendof thefourth ventricle.Themostoutstanding
featurehereis theinferior olive. Hindbrain attheleveloftherostralpartoftheinferior olive.
-Thecaudalendofthefourthventricleis onlyathintubethatis continuous with Therostralhindbraincontains thebasilarpontinenuclei.Theaxons fromthesenucleicross
thecentralcanal,butitexpands inmorerostralsections tocoverthewholedorsal themidlinetoformthehugemiddlecerebellarpeduncle.
surfaceofthehindbrain.
Rostralhindbrain showingthepontinenucleiandthemiddlecerebellar peduncles.
Thehindbrain atthelevelofthemiddleof thefourth ventricle. Theexternalcuneatenucleus receives positionsenseinformationfromtheupperlimband
neckandsends this informationtothecerebellumofthesameside.Theexternalcuneatenu-
cleus is locatedmedialtotheinferiorcerebellarpeduncle.
THEPRECEREBELLARNUCLEIANDTHECEREBELLARPEDUNCLES
Therostralhindbraingives risetothecerebellum,whichexpands tocovermostofthedorsal
surfaceof thehindbrain.Threelargenucleiinthehindbrainprojecttothecerebellum.They
aretheexternalcuneatenucleus,theinferiorolive,andthebasilarpontinenuclei,andarecol-
lectivelyreferredtoas precerebellar nuclei.Thefibers travellingfromtheinferioroliveand
25 26

Cerebrospinalfluidfromtheventricles oftheforebraintravels downtheaqueducttoreachthe
fourthventricle.Thefluidescapes throughholes intheroofofthefourthventricletoreachthe
subarachnoidspace.
Sections throughthepontineexpansionlookverydifferentfromthoseattheleveloftheinfe-
rior olivebecausetheyaredominatedbythehugepontinenucleiandcrossingpontinefibers.
However,somefeatures arecontinuations of structures observedinthecaudalhindbrain.
Examinethefollowingimagetoidentifythesefeatures:
Theexternalcuneatenucleus lies justmedialtothedarkinferior cerebellar peduncleatthe
dorsolateralcorner oftherostralhindbrain.
Theinferioroliveis alarge,foldednucleus intherostralhalfofthecaudalhindbrain.
-thefibers thatformthepyramidarehereswallowedupbythepontinenucleiand
crossingfibers,buttheystillformadistinctbundle.However,itis notcalledthepyra-
midhere;instead,thesefibers arereferredtoas thelongitudinalfibers ofthepons,
whicharemadeupofcorticospinalandcorticopontinefibers.
-thefibers ofthemediallemniscus arestillpresent,buttheynolongerlievertically;
theyareforcedtoassumeahorizontalposition,sittingabovethepontineexpansion.
-thefourthventricleseparates thelongitudinalpartofthehindbrainfromthecerebel-
lum.Thecerebellumforms theroofoftherostralhalfofthefourthventricle
-theinferiorcerebellarpeduncleis stillpresent,butithas moveddorsallytoenterthe
Theinferior oliveforms a distinctivebulgeon theventralsurfaceofthehindbrain,lateral cerebellum,lyinglateraltothefourthventricle.
tothepyramid.
Adominantfeatureofthis sectionis themiddlecerebellarpeduncle,butithas beencutjust
Axons of inferiorolivecells traveltotheoppositecerebellarhemisphereviatheinferiorcere- beforeitenters thecerebellum.Ontheleft-handsideofthis image,youcanseethefibers of
bellarpeduncle,wheretheyprovidetimingsignals for coordinationofmovement. thetrigeminalnerveas theytravelthroughthemiddlecerebellar peduncletoreachthesur-
face.
Thebasilar pontinenucleiconstitutethelargestgroupofneurons inthehumanbrainstem. Thenextimageshows asectionthroughtherostralendofthepontineexpansion.Itshows
Theyreceiveinputfromthecerebralcortexandsendtheiraxons totheoppositecerebellar somefeatures thatwereseeninthelowersectionbuthas someotherdistinctivefeatures.
hemisphere.Thefibers leavingthepontinenucleiformthemiddlecerebellarpeduncle.The
pontinenucleiandthecrossingpontocerebellarfibers formamassivebulgewhichcovers
mostof therostralhindbrain,seeninimages inthesectionabove.
SECTIONS OFTHEROSTRALHINDBRAIN SHOWINGTHEPONTINEEXPANSION
Next,wewillexaminesections of therostralhindbrain,wherethedominantfeatureis the
pontineexpansion.Themostusefullandmarkinidentifyingthelevelofthesesections is the
fourthventricle.Thefourthventricleis widestatthecaudalendofthepontineexpansion,and
itbecomes progressivelynarrow as itapproaches themidbrain,whereitforms thetube-like
aqueduct.
27 28

SECTIONSTHROUGHTHEMIDBRAIN
Thenextimageis asectionthroughthecaudalmidbrain.Itis particularlyinterestingbecause
this partofthemidbrainoverlaps theisthmus andtherostralpartofthebasilarpontineforma-
tion.Thedorsalpartofthesectionis atthecaudalpartoftheinferiorcolliculus ofthemId-
brain,butthemiddleof thesectionshows features of themostrostralsegmentofthehind-
brain–thedecussationofthesuperior cerebellar peduncleandthenucleus ofthetrochlear
nerve.
Asection through therostralhindbrain showingthedecussation ofthesuperior cerebellar
peduncles.
-thecorticospinalandcorticopontinefibers (longitudinalfibers ofthepons)forma
prominentbundleinthecenter ofthebasilar pontineformation
-themediallemniscus stilllies dorsaltothebasilarpons,butithas movedawayfrom
themidline
-themiddlecerebellarpeduncleis notseenherebecauseithas leftthebrainstemto
enterthecerebellum Asection through thecaudalmidbrain,showingtheoverlapwith rostralhindbrain struc-
-thefourthventriclehas shrunkdowntoasmalltubethatis abouttobecometheaque- tures –thedecussation ofthesuperior cerebellar peduncles andtherostralpontinenuclei.
ductofthemidbrain.
Themostventralpartof thesectioncuts throughthemostrostralpartofthebasilarpontine
Anentirelynew featureof this sectionis theappearanceofthesuperiorcerebellarpeduncle, formation.Lateraltothecrossingpontinefibers is averylargefiberbundleformedbythecor-
whichis averyprominentfibergroupjustdorsaltothemediallemniscus -.This peduncle ticospinalandcorticopontinefibers.This bundleis calledthecerebralpeduncle(crus cerebri).
consists offibers thathaveleftthecerebellumandareheadingtowardtheirterminationinthe
thalamus.Atthis level,thesuperiorcerebellar peduncleis crossingthemidline–thecrossing Thenextsectionis exclusivelyamidbrainsectionatthelevelof thesuperiorcolliculus.Inthe
is therefor calledthedecussationof thesuperior cerebellarpeduncle.This crossingis anim- centeris theaqueduct,whichis surroundedbythepaleperiaqueductalgraymatter.Abovethe
portantlandmarkbecauseitoccurs inthemostrostralsegmentofthehindbrain(theisthmus). periaqueductalgrayarethetwosuperior colliculi,whichhaveacharacteristicallylaminated
appearance.
Asection through thesuperior colliculus ofthemidbrain.
Below theperiaqueductalgrayaretwodarkroundmasses.Theycontainthefibers ofthesu-
periorcerebellar peduncle,whichis ascendingtowardthethalamus.However,this regionco-
29 30

incides withthelocationoflargecells of therednucleus,acellgroupthatgives risetothede- The brain stem cranial nerves
scendingrubrospinaltract.Theappearanceofthecells is obscuredbythefibers ofthesupe-
rior cerebellarpeduncle.
Lateraltotherednucleus,atthelateraledgeofthemidbrain,is theverylargecerebralpedun-
cle,whichcontains corticospinalandcorticopontinefibers thatareheadingtowards thehind- Cranialnerves 1and2(theolfactoryandopticnerves) areconnectedwiththeforebrain.The
brain.Ontheinnermarginof thedarkcerebralpeduncleis anextensivepaleareacalledthe remainingtencranialnerves (cranialnerves 3to12) arisefromthebrainstem.
substantianigra.Thereasonfortheapparentlycontradictorynameis thatinfreshbrainspeci-
mens,theareais stainedblackbyirondeposits.Someofthecells ofthesubstantianigracon-
taindopamine,andwhichprojecttomotor centers in theforebrain.
Betweentherednucleus (superior cerebellarpeduncle)andthecerebralpeduncleis theelon-
gatedmediallemniscus,whichhas beenpushedlaterally.
Animportantfeatureofthis sectionis thepresenceofstreaks offibers thatstartfromunder
theperiaqueductalgrayandwhichcoursethroughtherednucleus.Thesearefibers oftheocu-
lomotornerve,whichareheadingtotheirpointof emergencebetweenthetwocerebralpe-
duncles (this spaceis calledtheinterpeduncular fossa).
Questions forrepetition
- Whatis thedifferencebetweenthespinalcordandthecaudalendofthehindbrain?
- Inwhichsensorypathways arethesuperiorandinferiorcolliculiinvolved?
- Whatarethenames ofthethreelargenucleithatprojectfromthehindbrainintothecere-
bellum?
- Whatis thenameofthepartof thehindbrainthatis mostrostrallylocated?
Theventralsurfaceofthehuman brain showingtheorigins ofthecranialnerves.
Theoculomotornerve(3n)emerges outoftheinterpeduncularfossafromtheventralsurface
ofthemidbrain.Thetrochlear nerve(4n)winds aroundthecerebralpeduncleafterexitingthe
dorsalsurfaceoftheisthmus (themostrostralsegmentofthehindbrain).Thetrigeminalnerve
emerges fromthebasilarpons.Thetrigeminalnerve(5n) is madeupoftwoparts,alargesen-
soryroot,andasmaller motorroot.Theabducens nerve(6n)emerges fromthecaudalborder
ofthepons.Thefacialnerve(7n)andthevestibulocochlear nerve(8n)leavethehindbrain
fromthelateralpartofthetrapezoidbody.Therootlets oftheglossopharyngealnerve(9n),
vagus nerve(10n),andaccessorynerve(11n)formalineatthelateralmarginofthecaudal
hindbrain.Therootlets ofthehypoglossalnerveemergefromthelateralborderofthepyra-
mid.
Cranialnerve3–theoculomotornerve
Thepairedoculomotornucleiarefoundatthelevelofthesuperior colliculus,closetothe
midline,andventraltotheperiaqueductalgreymatter.
Thefibers oftheoculomotor nervecoursethroughtherednucleus ontheirwaytotheinterpe-
duncular fossa.Themainoculomotornucleus contains somaticmotorneurons thatsupplyall
theeyemuscles exceptthesuperior obliqueandthelateralrectus muscles.Thesmaller
Edinger–Westphalnucleus contains preganglionicparasympatheticneurons thatsupplythe
constrictorofthepupilandtheciliarymuscle.Damagetotheoculomotornerveresults inadi-
vergentsquint(theeyeontheparalyzedsideis pulledlaterallyanddownwards awayfromthe
lineofvision),droopingoftheeyelid(ptosis –duetopartialparalysis oftheeyelidraising
muscle),anddilatationofthepupil.
31 32

Cranialnerve9–theglossopharyngealnerve
Theglossopharyngealnervereceives tastefibers fromtheposteriorthirdofthetongue,which
terminates inthenucleus of thesolitarytract.Theglossopharyngealnervecontains parasym-
patheticfibers thatsupplytheparotidsalivarygland,andwhichariseintheinferiorsalivatory
nucleus.Italsosupplies asinglepharyngealmuscle,thepalatoglossus,withfibers thatarisein
Paralysis oftherightoculomotor nerve–divergentsquint,dilatedpupil,anddroopingeye-
thenucleus ambiguous.
lid.
Cranialnerve10–thevagus nerve
Cranialnerve4–thetrochlearnerve
Thevagus nervesupplies parasympatheticfibers tothethoracicandabdominalviscera.The
Thetrochlearnucleus is locatedimmediatelycaudaltotheoculomotorcomplexdorsolateral
parasympatheticnucleus ofthevagus (thedorsalmotornucleus of thevagus)lies justmedial
tothemediallongitudinalfasciculus.Whilethetrochlearnucleus was traditionallythoughtto
tothesulcus limitans insections oftheopenmedulla.Thenucleus ofthesolitarytractlies just
belocatedinthemidbrain,itis now clearthatitbelongs tothemostrostralsegmentofthe
lateraltothedorsalmotornucleus ofthevagus.Itreceives tastefibers fromthefacial,glos-
hindbrain,calledtheisthmus.Thesmalltrochlear nerveexits thedorsalsurfaceofthebrain-
sopharyngealandvagus nerves,andgeneralvisceralafferentfibers fromthevagus nerve.The
stem.Itcrosses themidlineinthesuperior medullaryvelumbeforewindingaroundthecere-
nucleus ambiguous contains largemultipolarmotor neurons,whichsupplythepharynx,
bralpeduncletosupplythesuperior obliquemuscleoftheeye.
palate,andlarynxmuscles viathevagus,cranialaccessory,andglossopharyngealnerves.
Cranialnerve5–thetrigeminalnerve
Cranialnerve11–theaccessorynerve
Thetrigeminalnervesupplies theskinof thefaceand themuscles ofmastication(thechewing
Thecranialpartoftheaccessorynervearises fromthenucleus ambiguous andis considered
muscles).Thesensoryfibers ofthetrigeminalnerveconnecttoaseries oflargenucleiextend-
bymanytobejustapartofthevagus nerve.Itcontributes tothevagalsupplyofthepharynx.
ingfromtherostralhindbraintothespinalcord.Theprincipalsensorytrigeminalnucleus is
Thespinalrootoftheaccessorynerveis amotornervesupplyingsternomastoidandtrapezius
foundatthelevelwherethetrigeminalnerveconnects withthehindbrain.Thetrigeminalmo-
muscles intheneck.Itarises frommotoneurons incervicalspinalcordlevels C2toC4.It
tornucleus lies medialtotheprincipalsensorynucleus.Thetworemainingnucleiofthe
travels intothecranialcavitytojoinbrieflywiththevagus nervebeforedescendingintothe
trigeminalcomplexarethespinal(descending) andmesencephalicnuclei.Thespinalnucleus
posteriortriangleoftheneck.
is foundinthedorsolateralhindbrainatalllevels below theprincipalnucleus andis continu-
ous caudallywiththesubstantiagelatinosaofthespinalcord.Themesencephalicnucleus of
Cranialnerve12–thehypoglossalnerve
thetrigeminalsystemis smallanddifficulttoseeinlow powersections.Itconsists ofasingle
Thehypoglossalnervesupplies themuscles ofthetongue.Thehypoglossalnucleus lies im-
layer of largeroundcells ontheedgeof theperiaqueductalgraymatterofthemidbrain.
mediatelydorsaltothemediallongitudinalfasciculus andis medialtothedorsalmotornu-
cleus ofthevagus inthefloorofthefourthventricle.Thehypoglossalnervefibers travelven-
Cranialnerve6–theabducens nerve
trallytoemergebetweentheinferioroliveandpyramid.
Theabducens nervesupplies thelateralrectus muscleoftheeye.Theabducens nucleus lies
nexttothemidlineclosetothemediallongitudinalfasciculus.Thefibers oftheemergingab-
ducens nervecanbeseenrunningdorsoventrallythroughthetegmentumofthehindbrain.
Functionalclassificationof motorandsensorynervefibers
Cranialnerve7–thefacialnerve
Thefibers thattravelinthecranialnerves canbeclassifiedonthebasis of theirfunctions.
Thefacialnervesupplies themuscles oftheface.Italsosupplies tastesensoryfibers tothe
Efferent(motor)fibers areclassifiedas eithersomaticefferent,visceralefferent,orbranchial
frontof thetongueandparasympatheticfibers tothesubmandibularsalivaryglandandother
efferent.
smallglands inthehead.Themotorfibers leavingthemainfacialnucleus takeanunusual
Afferent(sensory)fibers areclassifiedas somaticsensory,visceralsensory,orspecialsensory.
coursethroughthehindbrain.Theytraveldorsomediallytocurlaroundtheabducens nucleus
Thefollowingtablesummarises thefunctionalcomponents ofeachofthecranialnerves
beforeheadingventrolaterallytoexitthebrainstemventraltothetrigeminalsensorynucleus.
Tastefibers inthefacialnerveconnectwiththenucleus ofthesolitarytract.
Cranialnerve8–thevestibulocochlearnerve
Thevestibulocochlearnervereceives sensoryfibers fromtheorgans ofbalance(mainlythe
semicircularcanals)andhearing(thecochlea).Inatransversesectionofthejunctionofthe
pons andmedulla,thevestibulocochlearnerveenters thebrainstemas twoseparatebundles,
whichstraddletheinferiorcerebellarpeduncle.Thoseenteringventraltothepedunclearethe
vestibularfibers,whilethoseseendorsalandlateralto thepedunclearethecochlearfibers.
Thedorsalandventralcochlearnucleiarepaleareas embeddedwithinthefibers ofthe
cochlearnerveas is arches aroundthepeduncle.Thedorsalcochlearnucleus is themore
prominentofthetwo;itis easilyrecognizableinsections as itsurmounts theinferiorcerebel-
larpeduncle.Fournucleicomprisethevestibular nuclearcomplex.Theyarenamedsuperior,
lateral,medial,andspinal(descending)vestibular nuclei.Thesefournucleiarearranged
withinadiamond-shapedareainthefloor ofthefourthventricle.
33 34

The cerebellum
Thecerebellumis anoutgrowthof therostralhindbrain,arisingfromtheregionjustcaudalto
themidbrain(theisthmus andthefirstrhombomere).Thedevelopingcerebellumis relatively
smallatbirth,butitgrows rapidlyinthepostnatalperiod.
Thecentralwhitematterofthecerebellumis arrangedlikethetrunkof atree,withaseries of
majorbranches coveredwithgreymatter.Inamid–sagittalsection,thecerebellumlooks like
asliceofcauliflower,withbranches ofwhitematter formingthemajorlobules ofthecentral
partofthecerebellum.Thepartof thecerebelluminthemidlineis calledthevermis.Thever-
mis consists oftenrecognizablelobules inallmammals.
Thecerebralcortexrelies onthecerebellumforthecoordinationofmovement.Thecerebral
cortexrequests informationfromthecerebellumviathehugecorticopontinepathwaythat
travels totherostralhindbrainandwhichsynapses inthepontinenuclei.Thepontinenuclei
sendtheiraxons totheoppositesideofthecerebellumviathemiddlecerebellarpeduncle.
Thecerebellumresponds torequests fromtheforebrainviathesuperior cerebellarpeduncle,
whichtravels totheventrolateralthalamicnucleus oftheoppositeside.Theinferiorcerebellar
pedunclecarries fibers thatariseinthespinalcordandbrainstemontheirwaytothecerebel-
larcortex.
Questions forrepetition
- Whichcranialnerves areconnectedtothebrainstem?
- Nametheconsequences of paralysis ofthethirdcranialnerve.
- Whatis thefifthcranialnervealsocalled?
- Whatis thefunctionofthesixthcranialnerve?
- Whatdotheparasympatheticfibers oftheglossopharyngealnerveinnervate?
- How manyfunctionalcomponents does theeleventhcranialnervehave?
Thedorsalspinocerebellar tractandthepathways connectingthecerebellum,thalamus,
motor cortex,andpons.
35 36

Lobules of the cerebellar vermis and the cerebellar hemisphere
Thevermis ofthecerebelluminallmammals is dividedintotenlobules byaseries ofdeep
fissures.Thelargestofthesefissures is theprimaryfissure,whichdivides theanteriorvermis
(lobules 1-5)fromtheposterior vermis (lobules 6-10).Eachofthelobules has atraditional
Latinname,buttheonlyoneworthrememberingis thenodule,whichis thenameforlobule
10.Thehumancerebellarhemisphereis extraordinarilyelaborate,markedbyhundreds ofin-
dividualfoliathatrunfrommedialtolateral.
Adiagramofthehuman cerebellumshowingthevermis andthehemispheres (a)andthe
deepcerebellar nuclei(c).
The cerebellum has an ipsilateral connection with the body
Eachsideof thecerebralcortexis connectedtosensoryandmotoractivities ontheopposite
sideofthebody,buteachsideof thecerebellumis connectedtothesamesideofthebody.
Whenonecerebellarhemisphereis damaged,theclassicsymptoms ofcerebellardamage,
whichareincoordinationofvoluntarymovementandtremor,occuronthesamesideas the
damage.
(a)Asagittalsection
The role of the cerebellum in motor control
Thecerebellumis responsiblefor thecoordinationofcomplexmovements.Itdoes this by
comparingthemotorcommands withtheactualbodymovements thatresult.Onthebasis of
this comparison,itcanadjustmotorcontroltoimproveaccuracy.This monitoringandfeed-
backoccurin real-timeandis mostimportantatthecrucialendstages ofapurposefulmove-
ment.Thecerebellumplays avitalroleinthemanagementofpostureandbalance;itreceives
Asagittalsection ofratcerebellumshowingtheten lobules ofthevermis.Thedeepprimary inputfromthevestibularsystemsothatitcanmonitorthepositionofthebodyinspace,andit
fissureseparates lobules 1-5(on theleft) fromlobules 6-10(on theright). canmakemajor posturaladjustments if thepersonis indangeroflosingtheirbalance.
Inprimates,thecerebellumis vitalforcoordinatingthemovements of thehands andeyes.For
monkeys,lifeinthetrees depends entirelyontheabilitytoplanandexecuteacrobaticleaps
Thecenterofthecerebellumis filledwithfibers –calledthedeepcerebellarwhitematter.
involvingthecerebellum,vestibularsystem,eyes,andhands.Humans havethemostsophisti-
Embeddedinthewhitematterarethreedeepcerebellarnucleioneachside.Thelargestof
catedversionofbinocularvisionamongtheprimates andhavelongfingers andopposable
thesenucleiis thedentatenucleus,whichis laterallyplaced.
thumbs.Thehumancerebellumhas evolvedtocapitalizeonthesecapacities throughthepre-
cisecoordinationofskilledfinger movements.Thefinecoordinationoffingermovementun-
derthecontrolofbinocularvisionhas givenhumans access totoolmanufacture.
Cerebellar peduncles
Thecerebellumis connectedtothehindbrainbythreecerebellarpeduncles oneachside:the The histological structure of the cerebellar cortex
inferiorpedunclemainlycontains fibers enteringthecerebellumfromthespinalcordandthe thecerebellarcortexis madeupofthreelayers,theoutermolecularlayer,thePurkinjecell
inferiorolive;thehugemiddlepedunclecontains fiberprojectingfromthebasilarpons tothe layer,andtheinnergranulecelllayer.Deeptothegranulecelllayeris thedeepcerebellar
cerebellum;thesuperiorpedunclecontains fibers thatleavethecerebellumtotravelthrough whitematter.
therednucleus toreachthethalamus. Thestructureofthecerebellar cortexis extraordinarilyuniform;thesamethreelayers are
seeninallparts of thecerebellum,andtheir relativethickness does notvary.Deeptothecor-
texis thedeepcerebellarwhitematter.
ThelargePurkinjecells aretheoutputcells ofthecerebellarcortex.Theiraxons projecttothe
cerebellarnuclei.
37 38

jointreceptors andmusclestretchreceptors,butitnow appears thatmostoftheinputcomes
fromreceptors thatdetectsensations of stretching,contact,orfoldingintheskin.Thesesensa-
tions provideveryfinedetailonthemovementofthelimbs andotherbodyparts.
Questions for repetition
- Of how manylayers is thecortexofthecerebellumconstituted?
- Is thecerebellumalsoconnected"side-wiseinverted" withthemuscles oftheotherhalfof
thebody?
- Towhichcells dothegranulecells sendtheir axonpotentials?
- How canthecerebellumcoordinatethecorrecttimingofmovementsignals?
- Whatareclassicsymptoms ofdamagetothecerebellum?
Cerebellar cortex.TheNisslstainedsection aboveshows themolecular layer (MoCb),the
Purkinjecelllayer (Pk),thegranulecelllayer (GrCb),andthedeepcerebellar whitematter
(cbw).Thediagrambelow shows thedendritictreeofaPurkinjecellin themolecular layer
andthetermination ofthePurkinjecellaxon in adeepcerebellar nucleus.
Mossy fibers and climbing fibers
Mostofthefibers projectingtothecerebellarcortexaremossyfibers thatsynapsewithgran-
ulecells.Theexceptionis theinputfromtheinferior olive,whichgoes directlytotheden-
dritictrees ofthePurkinjecells intheformof climbingfibers.Themossyfibers arisefrom
cells inthepontinenucleiandotherlargeprecerebellarnucleiinthehindbrainandfromthe
spinalcord.Thegranulecells sendtheiraxons tothedendrites ofPurkinjecells.Thegranule
cells aretinybutverytightlypacked-aboutonemillionpercubicmillimeter;thegranule
cells compriseabout70%ofalltheneurons inthebrain.As notedabove,theaxons fromthe
inferiorolivarynucleus formclimbingfibers,whichmakedirectcontactwiththedendritic
trees ofthePurkinjecells.Thereis evidencethattheinferiorolivarycells controlthetime
codeof thecerebellum,thus ensuringthateverylearnedmovementis playedbackinexactly
therighttimingsequence—theinferior olivecells fireatabout10Hz(tenactionpotentials per
second).
Microelectroderecordings intheratsuggestthateveryfoliuminthecerebellumcodes adif-
ferentmovementsequence.Forexample,someareconcernedwithtakingfoodwiththefin-
gers andtransferringittothemouth,andothers areinvolvedinrunningbehavior.Giventhe
tens ofthousands offoliainthehumancerebellum,itis possiblethatthecerebellumkeeps
learningnew movementsequences intoadultlife.Perhaps thereis evenabackhandfoliumin
keentennis players!
Thelargestconnectionofthehumancerebellumis theconnectionwiththemotorcortex.The
hugecorticopontinepathwayarises fromthecerebralcortex,synapses inthepons,andenters
thecerebellumthroughthemiddlecerebellarpeduncle.This seems tobeawayforthemotor
cortextoaskforhelpfromthecerebellumwhencoordinationofacomplexmovementis re-
quired.Theanswercomes backtothemotorcortexviathesuperiorcerebellarpeduncle.The
fibers ofthesuperiorcerebellar pedunclesynapseintheventrolateralnucleus ofthethalamus,
andthethalamocorticalfibers traveltothemotorcortex.
Therelationshipbetweencellnumbers inthecerebralcortexandthecerebellumis verycon-
sistentacross themammaliangroups.Althoughthesizeofthecerebralcortexvaries agreat
dealfromonemammalianfamilytoanother,theproportionalrelationshipbetweenthenum-
ber ofcerebralcorticalcells andthenumberof cerebellarcells is thesame–about1:4.
Themainwaythecerebellumtracks movementinthelimbs is fromsensations fromtheskin.
Itusedtobethoughtthatthemostimportantinformationonmovementwouldcomefrom
39 40

DIENCEPHALON Itis notnecessarytomemorizethenames of allthethalamicnuclei;thekeyones arethenu-
cleithatconnecttothemainsensorypathways–ventroposterior (VP,somatosensory),dorsal
lateralgeniculate(DLG,vision),andmedialgeniculate(MG,hearing),towhichshouldbe
The diencephalon
addedtheventrolateralnucleus (VL),whichreceives inputfromthecerebellumandglobus
pallidus andprojects tothemotorcortex.Theremainingthalamicnucleiprojecttoassociation
Thediencephalonsits betweenthemidbrainandthehypothalamus.Thecentralpartofthedi-
areas ofthecerebralcortex.
encephalonis thethalamus.Theother parts ofthediencephalonaretheprethalamus infront
Thedorsomedialedgeof thethalamus carries thehabenularnuclei,towhichareattachedthe
ofthethalamus andthepretectalareabehind.Eachofthethreeparts ofthediencephalonis a
stalkof thepinealgland.Thepinealglandsecretes melatonin,whichinfluences thesleepcy-
completesegmentoftheneuraltube,withalar andbasalcomponents,calledthediencephalic
cle.
prosomeres:thepretectalareais includedindiencephalicprosomere1;thethalamicareais in-
cludedindiencephalicprosomere2;theprethalamus is includedindiencephalicprosomere3.
Prethalamus
Theword‘diencephalon’means ‘interbrain’–referringtothefactthatthis regionlinks the
Themostrostraldiencephalicprosomere(p3) contains thezonaincerta–animportantregion
mainparts oftheforebrain withthebrainstem.
formotorcontrol.InParkinson’s disease,stimulatingelectrodes thatareinsertedintothezona
incertacanminimizetremors andmusclestiffness inpatients withParkinsonism.This is
calleddeepbrainstimulation(DBS),andthetreatmentis usuallyverysuccessful.Thereticu-
larnucleiofp3playanimportantroleduringsleepbycontrollingtheoutputofthethalamus
tothecortex.After sleepis established,theinhibitory(GABAergic)neurons ofp3takecon-
troloftheactivityofthemainthalamicnucleitosetuparhythmicwavepatternofelectrical
activityinthecortex.
Pretectal area
Themostcaudaldiencephalicprosomere(p1)contains thenucleiofthepretectalarea.These
nucleiplayaroleinvisualreflexes.Aprominentp1landmarkatthejunctionoftheprethala-
mus withthemidbrainis theposteriorcommissure,whichbelongs top1andnottothemid-
brain,as previouslysupposed.
Questions for repetition
- Of whatparts does thediencephalonconsistof?
- Describethespatialrelationshipofthethalamus andhypothalamus fromadevelopmental
perspective?
- Whichthalamicnucleus is integratedintothevisualpathway?
- Whichpartofthediencephalonis stimulatedwithdeepbrainstimulationtocombat
Parkinsonism?
Adiagramshowingthesegmentalcomponents ofthedevelopingbrain.Thediencephalic
- Inwhichfunctionis thepretectalareainvolved?
segments p1,p2,andp3areshown.Notethehabenular stalkatthecaudalendofthedorsal
surfaceofthethalamus.
Thalamus
Inamid-sagittalsectionofthebrain,thethalamus sits dorsaltothehypothalamus.This ledto
along-heldmisunderstandingthatthehypothalamus is actuallyventraltothethalamus in
topologicalterms.However,therelationshipbetweenthetwois notas itseems.Becauseof
thesharp(almost180degrees) bendingof theneuraxis atthemidbrainduringdevelopment
(thecephalicflexure),thehypothalamus is actuallyrostraltothediencephalonindevelop-
mentalterms.
Thethalamus receives inputfromallthesensorysystems excepttheolfactorysystem.Eachof
thevisual,auditory,andtouch(somatosensory)sensorypathways terminates inits ownspe-
cialpartofthethalamus:thevisualpathwayends inthedorsallateralgeniculatenucleus;the
auditorypathwayends inthemedialgeniculatenucleus;thetouchpathwayends intheventro-
posterior nucleus.Eachofthesesensorythalamicnucleithensends sensoryinformationtothe
corticalareareservedforthatmodality.Inaddition,informationonmovementcoordination
fromthecerebellumalsoreaches theventrolateralnucleus ofthethalamus,andtheinforma-
tionis sentontothepartofthecortexconcernedwith motorcontrol–theprimarymotorcor-
tex.
41 42

HYPOTHALAMUS
The hypothalamus
Thename'hypothalamus' is derivedfromanoutdatedview thatthehypothalamus was simply
aventraladditiontothethalamus.New datafromdevelopmentalgeneexpressionhas re-
vealedafarmorecriticalrolefor thehypothalamus.Itis now clearthatthehypothalamus is
formedfromthemostrostralpartoftheneuraltube,anditis responsibleforgeneratingthe
wholeof thetelencephalonfromits alar plate.Itis byfarthemostcrucialcenterinthedevel-
opinghumanbrain.
Oneofthereasons formisunderstandingtheproperanatomicalplaceofthehypothalamus is a
lackof appreciationoftheeffectof thecervicalflexureofthedevelopingneuraltube.This se-
verebendintheembryonicneuraxis pushes thehypothalamus toits adultpositionunderthe
thalamus.
Thehypothalamus comprises thefirsttwoneuralsegments –theterminalprosomereandthe
peduncular prosomere.Theterminalhypothalamicprosomeregives risetotheeyeandthete-
lencephalonfromits alarplate,givingrisetotheposteriorpituitaryglandfromits basalplate.
Thepeduncularhypothalamicprosomereis connected toprosomere3ofthediencephalon
Features ofthehypothalamus seeninamid-sagittalsection
Inamid-sagittalsectionofthebrain,theprominentanatomicallandmarks ofthehypothala-
mus canbeseen–theopticchiasmrostrally,themammillarybodies caudally,andthepitu-
itarystalkbetweenthetwo.
Themostrostralpartofthehypothalamus sits abovetheopticchiasm.Thehypothalamicnu-
cleus sittingimmediatelyabovethechiasmis appropriatelycalledthesuprachiasmaticnu-
cleus.This nucleus serves as a24-hourclockforthebrain;its neurons haveaninternaltiming
systemthatcanbeadjustedwithlightintensityinformationfromtheopticnerves.Ifanani-
malis keptincompletedarkness,theclockreverts toa25-hourcycle.Theclockis essential
forthetimingofpeaks ofhormonalsecretions fromendocrineglands.
Thecentralpartofthehypothalamus thatbears thepituitarystalkis calledthetubercinereum.
Thehypothalamus andsurvivalbehaviors
Asagittalsection oftheratbrain showingthemain parts ofthehypothalamus.
Duringvertebrateevolution,complexbehaviors andmovementsets becameorganizedinahi-
Thepituitarystalkis attachedclosetoVMH.
erarchyof modules inthebrain.Atthetopofthehierarchyarebehaviors relatingtothesur-
MB=mammillarybody;Pa=paraventricular nucleus;SCh=suprachiasmaticnucleus;
vivaloftheindividualandthespecies.Theseincludeeating,drinking,defensivebehaviors,
VMH=ventromedialhypothalamicnucleus.
reproduction,andthebasicmovementpatterns neededtoexploretheimmediateenvironment.
Thesesurvivalbehaviors areprimarilycontrolledbythehypothalamus.Thehypothalamic
controlcenters forsurvivalbehaviors areclusteredintwomaingroups.Thefirstgroupin-
cludes systems fordefense,reproduction,andingestion(feedinganddrinking).Thenuclei
thatcontrolthesebehaviorsets,includingthelargeventromedialnucleus,arelocatedinthe
medialhalfofthehypothalamus.Eachspecificbehaviorset,suchas eating,is relatedtoone
particularsetofhypothalamicnuclei.Thesecondgroupofsurvivalbehaviororganizers is lo-
catedinthemammillarybodyinthecaudalpartofthehypothalamus andinnearbymidbrain
parts (thesubstantianigraandtheventraltegmentalarea).This secondgroupinitiates ex-
ploratoryandforagingbehaviors,suchas turningtheheadandeyes towardanobjectofinter-
estandwalkingorrunningtoexplorethesurroundings.
43 44

Controlof theendocrinesystembythehypothalamus Thecontrolovertheanteriorpituitaryis notas direct:cells intheparaventricularnucleus re-
Thehypothalamus has severalpowerfulneurongroups thatcontrolthehormonalsecretions of leasetinyamounts ofreleasinghormones intoaspecializedportalbloodsystemthatcarries
thepituitarygland.Langdon-Brownfamouslydescribedthepituitaryglandas 'theleaderin themtotheanteriorpituitary.Aportalbloodsystemhas twosets ofcapillaries connectedbya
theendocrineorchestra' (Hubble,1961).This is aclevermetaphorthatreserves theroleofthe portalvein.Inthecaseofthepituitary,thefirstcapillarybedcollects thereleasinghormones
conductor oftheorchestrafor thehypothalamus.Inanorchestra,theconductorgives direc- fromthehypothalamus.Smallportalveins transportthereleasinghormones tothesecond
tions tothefirstviolin,whois theorchestra's leader. capillarybedintheanterior pituitary,wheretheyreachendocrinesecretingcells.Thereleas-
Hypothalamiccontrolovertheposterior pituitaryis direct.Largeneurosecretorycells inthe inghormones stimulatethereleaseofthemajorhormones fromanteriorpituitarycells -
paraventricularandsupraopticnucleisendtheir axons totheposteriorpituitary,releasingoxy- growthhormone(GH),thyroid-stimulatinghormone(TSH),adrenocorticotrophichormone
tocinandvasopressinintothebloodstream.Oxytocinstimulates contractionoftheuterus at (ACTH),follicle-stimulatinghormone(FSH),prolactin(PRL),andluteinizinghormone(LH).
birthandinitiates milksecretionafterbirth.Italsoplays animportantroleinadultpair-bond-
ingandmaternal-infantattachment.Vasopressin,alsocalledantidiuretichormone(ADH),in-
creases bloodpressureandcontrols urineproduction.
Thehypothalamus secretes releasinghormones which stimulatetheendocrinecells ofthe
anterior pituitarytoreleasetheir hormoneproducts.Thereleasinghormones aredelivered
tohypothalamiccapillaries thatdrain intoveins which formaspecialportalvenous system.
Theportalveins endin asecondcapillarysystemin theanterior pituitary.
Hypothalamicsecretion of theposterior pituitaryhormones oxytocin andADH(vaso-
pressin).Thehormones areproducedbyneurosecretorycells in theparaventricular nu-
Questions forrepetition
cleus andarereleasedfromaxon terminals thatreach theposterior pituitary.
- Fromwhichprosomeres does thehypothalamus arise?
- Whichhypothalamicnucleus is responsiblefordeterminingthecircadianrhythm?
- Whichhypothalamicstructures areinvolvedinbehaviors suchas foragingandexplo-
ration?
- Whathormones aresecretedintheposteriorpituitarygland?
- Whatkindofhormones aresecretedintheanterior pituitarygland?
45 46

Telencephalon
The Telencephalon
TELENCEPHALON –THECEREBRALHEMISPHERES
Thetwotelencephalicoutgrowths arisefromthedevelopinghypothalamus.Thetelencephalic
outgrowthoneachsideforms thecerebralhemisphereorcerebrum.Thecerebralhemisphere
ofeachsideconsists ofanouterlayeror palliumandasubpalliallayer.Thepalliumincludes
thecortex.Thesubpalliumforms severaldeepcellgroups,thelargestofwhicharethestria-
tumandpallidum(sometimes calledthebasalganglia).
Thetwotelencephalicoutgrowths arisefromthealar plateoftherostralhypothalamicseg-
ment.This diagramshows onlyonetelencephalicoutgrowth.Thetelencephalon forms the Acoronalsection through theforebrain ofamouseshowingthefour pallialareas –medial
pallium(thefuturecortex)andthesubpallium(mainlythestriatumandpallidum). pallium(MP),dorsalpallium(DP),lateralpallium(LP),andventralpallium(VP).The
corpus callosumseparates themedialpallium(hippocomapus) formthedorsalpallium
Thepalliumcanbedividedintomedial,dorsal,lateral,andventral.Inmammals,mostofthe (neocortex).
cerebralcortexis derivedfromthedorsalpalliumand is calledtheneocortex.Theareas deriv-
ingfromtheventralpalliummainlybelongtotheolfactorysystem.Theolfactorycortexis
sometimes referredtoas allocortex.
Thesmallerlateralpallium,whichlies betweentheneocortexandtheolfactorycorticalareas,
forms asmallareaoftheneocortexcalledtheinsula,whichis mainlydevotedtotasteandvis-
ceralsensation.Themedialpallialsubdivisiongives risetothehippocampus.
Neocortex
Thehumanneocortexis massivelyexpanded.Foldingincreases its surfacearea,forming
raisedareas (gyri)andgrooves (sulci).
Thepattern ofsulciandgyrivaries fromperson toperson,butsomegyrican beconsis-
tentlyidentified.
47 48

Thecerebrumcanbedividedintolobes,whicharenamedfortheoverlyingcranialbones –
frontal,parietal,temporal, andoccipital. Atahistologicallevel,theneocortexis madeupof sixwell-definedlayers,numberedoneto
six.Theprimarysensoryareas arecharacterizedbydenselayers ofgranulecells -layers 2and
4.Theprimarymotorcortexis characterizedbyaprominentpyramidalcelllayer(layer5)and
avirtualabsenceofthemaingranulecelllayer(layer4)andsois oftenreferredtoas the
agranularcortex.Manypyramidalcells inlayer5areverylarge,sendingaxons overgreatdis-
tances toreachmotorneurons inthespinalcord.
Thelobes ofthecerebrumas viewedfromthelateralside.Thecentralsulcus separates the
frontalandparietallobes.Thelateralfissureseparates thetemporallobefromthefrontal
andparietallobes.
Theneocortexhas well-definedsensoryareas for thereceptionoftouch(S1),vision(V1),
hearing(A1),andtaste.Thevisualcortexis locatedin theoccipitalpoleofthecortex,andthe
auditorycortexis locatedin thetemporallobe.Thetouch(somatosensorycortex)is located
rostrallynearthefrontalpole.Theneocortexhas noolfactorysensoryareabecauseallolfac-
toryinformationprojects totheventralcorticalareas –theolfactorybulb,olfactorytubercle,
andpiriformcortex.Infrontof thesomatosensorycortexis theprimarymotorcortex–an
areadevotedtovoluntarymotor controloftheoppositesideofthebody.Electricalstimulation
ofthemotorcortexproduces movements ontheoppositesideofthebody.Themotorcortex
sends amajorpathwaytothebrainstem(corticobulbartract)andanothertothespinalcord
(corticospinaltract)toinitiatemovements.
Acoronalsection ofthemouseforebrain showingthehistologicaldifferencebetween the
primarymotor cortex(M1)andprimarysomatosensorycortex(S2).Thegranular layer 4is
missingfromM1butveryprominentin S1.
TheHippocampus
Thehippocampus is thepartof thecerebralcortexthatis involvedinmemorysystems.The
hippocampus arises fromthemedialpallium.Itconsists of thedentategyrus,thethreeCAre-
gions,thesubiculum,andtheentorhinalcortex.Thehippocampus is responsibleforshort-
termmemoryregistration.
Theentorhinalcortexis locatedintheparahippocampalgyrus is likeaGPS thatcontains a
precisetwo-dimensionalgridmapof surroundings;ithelps tolinkthememoryofevents to
theplaceinwhichtheyoccurred.Theentorhinalcortexsends placeinformationtothehip-
pocampus inachainofconnections fromthedentategyrus,theCA3region,andfinallytothe
CA1region.TheCA1regionsends its informationtothesubiculum,whichis theoutputcen-
terforthehippocampus.Thesubiculumprojects totheseptumandhypothalamus viaalarge
fiberbundlecalledthefornix.
Subpallialstructures
Under thecoveringofthepalliumareanumberoflargespecializedneurongroups.The
largestofthesegroups arethestriatumandpallidum,whichplayessentialroles inthecontrol
Theprimarysensoryandmotor areas in thecortex. Theprimarysomatosensoryarea(S1)
ofmovements.Thesmaller subpallialgroups (theamygdala,septum,andpreopticarea)are
is separatedfromtheprimarymotor area(M1)bythecentralsulcus.Theprimaryauditory
concernedwithemotionalexpressionandbehaviorpatterns.
areais separatedfromS1bythedeeplateralfissure(notlabeledhere).Theprimaryvisual
areais almostentirelylocatedon themedialsideoftheoccipitallobe.Thetasteareacannot
beseen in this diagrambecauseitis hidden in thelateralfissure.
49 50

Striatumandpallidum–the'basalganglia' Theamygdala
Thelargestofthesubpallialgroups arethestriatumandglobus pallidus.Traditionalterminol- Theamygdalalies deeptothepiriform(primaryolfactory) cortexonthemedialsideofthe
ogyrefers tothis pairas the'basalganglia.' Unfortunately,differentbooks usethetermbasal temporallobe,justrostraltothehippocampus.Theamygdalais acomplexstructuremadeup
gangliainavarietyofdifferentways,someaddingtheamygdalaandotherdeepforebrain ofmanydifferentsubnuclei.Thesubnucleioftheamygdalacanbedividedintotwomain
structures,andsomeevenaddingparts ofthediencephalonandmidbrainsuchas thezonain- groups –amedicalgroupthatis interconnectedwiththeolfactorysystemandalateralgroup
certaandsubstantianigra. Becauseof this,itis besteithertoavoidtheuseofthetermbasal thatis connectedtocircuits involvedinemotionalresponses,particularlyfear.Thelateral
gangliaaltogetherortomakeitclear whenyouarereferringtothestriatumandglobus pal- groupintheamygdalaresponds tosensations thatsignaldanger.Itcanreactbyactivatingau-
lidus alone. tonomicandendocrinecenters,suchas the'fightorflight' mechanisms.Mostofthesecircuits
arecloselyinterconnectedwiththehypothalamus.Fearandstress cangenerateverypowerful,
unconscious emotionalmemories throughtheamygdala.Theseunconscious fears arevery
difficulttosuppress orerase.
Anothermajorroleoftheamygdalais its controlofhierarchicalbehavior(peckingorder)in
vertebrates.Socialhierarchies arefundamentalinanimals thatbelongtolargegroups where
dominancebehaviors maintaintheeffectivestructureofthegroup.
Thereis acomplexrelationshipbetweentheamygdalaandaggressivebehavior,andthena-
tureof aggressivebehavioris oftenmisinterpreted.KonradLorenzarguedthatthestrongest
forms of aggressivebehavior arethosethatoccurbetweenmembers ofthesamespecies,usu-
allyrelatedtoattempts toestablishaplaceinahierarchy(Lorenz,2002).
Adiscreditedterm–'TheLimbicSystem'
Inmanytextbooks,asectiondealingwiththeamygdalaandrelatedstructures is titled'The
LimbicSystem.'Westronglyrecommendyouavoidusingthis termbecauseitcanbedefined
inmanydifferentandconfusingways.Theterm'limbic' has its originin'legrandlobelim-
bique' ofBroca.Brocawantedtodraw attentiontothecurvedbeltoftelencephalicstructures
thatborderthecentralparts oftheforebrain(thewordlimbicrefers toaborderland).This
originaldefinitionof the'limbiclobe' includedtheventralhippocampus,theamygdala,the
cingulategyrus,andthefornix.However,inthecontemporaryliterature,thelimbiclobeis of-
tensaidtoincludeallthevarious parts ofthehippocampalformation,theseptum,theolfac-
torytubercle,andthebednucleus ofthestriaterminalis,theamygdala,andthecingulate
gyrus.Differentauthors addor subtractstructures fromthedefinitioninwhatsometimes
seems tobearandommanner.Somegosofar as toincludethehypothalamus andparts ofthe
brainstem.Theirlogicis thatallstructures thatmightbeinvolvedinemotions orprimitivebe-
haviors shouldbelumpedtogetherunderthis title.Theresultis soconfusingthatwestrongly
recommendthatyouavoidusingtheterm'limbic' altogether.
Thesubcorticalwhitematter
Middleslicetoshowstriatum,pallidumandthalamus. Deeptothecerebralcortexis athicklayerof whitematter.Inconnectionalterms,theaxons in
thecerebralwhitematterareofthreetypes –associationfibers,commissuralfibers,andpro-
jectionfibers.Theassociationfibers runfromoneareaof thecortextoanotherareaofthecor-
Thestriatumcontains twoparts,thecaudatenucleus andtheputamen.Onthemedialsideof texwithinthesamehemisphere.Theymaybeshort(joiningthecortexofadjacentgyri,for
theputamenis thepallidum,representedchieflybytheglobus pallidus.Togetherthestriatum example)ormayformlongassociationbundles runningfromonelobetoanother.Thecom-
andpallidumformapowerfulmotor controlsystem,enablingthebraintochoosefroma'li- missuralfibers joincorticalareas of onehemispheretoequivalentareas ontheoppositeside.
brary' of inheritedstereotypedbehaviors accordingtotheneedatanymoment.Thestriatum Theprojectionfibers traveldownwards fromthecortextothestriatum,pallidum,dien-
receives asignificantinputfromthemotor cortex,and itinturnprojects totheglobus pal- cephalon,midbrain,hindbrain,andspinalcord,orupwards fromthethalamus tothecortex.
lidus.Theglobus pallidus totheventrolateralnucleus ofthethalamus andthecircuitis com-
pletedbytheprojectionofthis nucleus tothemotorcortex.Anotherimportantinputconnec-
Forebraincommissures
tionof thestriatumis thedopaminergicpathwaythatarises fromthesubstantianigra.Damage
Therearefourcommissures intheforebrain,thelargestof whichis thecorpus callosum,
tothis dopaminergicprojectionis theunderlyingcauseofParkinson's disease.
whichconnects theneocorticalareas ofthetwosides.Thehippocampalcommissure(fornix
Aless well-knownpartofthestriatumis theaccumbens nucleus,whichlies ventraltotheros-
commissure)connects therightandlefthippocampalregions.Theanteriorcommissurecon-
tralparts ofthecaudateand putamen.Theaccumbens nucleus alsoreceives adopaminergic
nects areas ofthetemporallobes,includingsomeolfactoryareas.Thesmallposteriorcom-
projectionfromthebrainstem,butinthis case,itcomes fromtheventraltegmentalarea,
missureis locatedinthepretectalareaofthediencephalon,adjacenttothemidbrain.
whichis medialtothesubstantianigra.Thedopaminergicprojectiontotheaccumbens forms
Thecorpus callosum lies under thecingulategyrus,abovetheseptum,andthelateralventri-
thebasis ofaninternalrewardsysteminthebrain.
cle.Therostralendis calledthegenu,thecentralpartis calledthebody,andthethickened
caudalendis calledthesplenium.Theventraltipofthegenuforms therostrumofthecorpus
51 52

callosum.Inmostcases,fibers crossinginthecorpus callosumconnectsymmetricalparts of The Broadmann areas of the cortex
thecortex.Thefibers crossinginthegenuof thecorpus callosumreachthetipofthefrontal
lobeinaU-shapedformationcalledtheforceps minor.Similarly,thefibers crossinginthe
spleniumreachthetipoftheoccipitallobeinalargerU-shapedformationcalledtheforceps Anumber ofanatomicallydistinctareas canberecognizedinthehumanneocortex.Many
major. modernstudies estimatethattheremaybeabout180anatomicallyandfunctionallydistinctar-
Thehippocampalcommissure(alsocalledthefornixcommissure) is locatedventraltothe eas inthehumanneocortex.
corpus callosum.
Theanteriorcommissureis locatedattherostralendofthediencephaloninfrontofthean- Therehavebeenseveralattempts overthepast150years todefinethemajorhumancortical
terior columns ofthefornix.Theanterior commissureis averyusefullandmarkinthestudy areas.Themostinfluentialis Brodmann's.
ofsections oftheforebrain:itlies attherostralendofthediencephalonatthelevelwherethe In1910,Brodmannpublishedanumberedlistof about50differentareas basedonhistologi-
interventricularforamenconnects thelateralventricletothethirdventricle.Thepreopticarea caldifferences.This numberingsystemis stillwidelyusedtoday.
is ventraltotheanteriorcommissure,whichis themostventralpartofthesubpallium,and ThemostrecognizedBrodmannareas arethefollowing:
caudaltothepreopticareais therostralendof thehypothalamus.Theanteriorcommissureis
alsoagoodmarkerfortherostralendofthehippocampus andtheamygdalainhumanbrain - area4–primarymotorcortex(M1)-locatedintheprecentralgyrus
slices. - areas 9and10–theprefrontalcortex–locatedrostraltotheprimarymotorcortex
Theposteriorcommissureis foundinthecaudalpretectalarea.Itlinks togetheranumberof - areas 3,1,and2–primarysomatosensorycortex(S1)-locatedinthepost-central
pretectalnucleiinvolvedin eyereflexes.Inthepast,theposteriorcommissurewas oftenmis- gyrus
takenlythoughttobelongtothemidbrain,butgeneexpressionproves itlies inthecaudaldi- - area41–primaryauditorycortex(A1) –locatedontheuppersurfaceofthesuperior
encephalon. temporalgyrus,mainlyinsidethelateralfissure
- area17–primaryvisualcortex(V1)–locatedonthemedialsurfaceoftheoccipital
lobeintheupper andlowerbanks ofthecalcarinesulcus
Questions forrepetition - areas 45and44-Broca's area(motorspeecharea)–locatedinthetriangularandoper-
cular parts oftheinferiorfrontalgyrus,immediatelyrostraltotheinferiorpartofthe
precentralgyrus inthedominanthemisphere
- Of whatdoes thetelencephalonconsistof? - areas 39and40–Wernicke's area(speechcomprehensionarea) –locatedontheupper
- Whatdoes thepalliumcomprise? surfaceofthesuperiortemporalgyrus caudaltotheprimaryauditorycortexinthe
- Whatenables thehumanbraintoundergomassiveexpansion? dominanthemisphere.MostofWernicke' areais insidethelateralfissure.
- Whatseparates theprimarymotorandtheprimarysensoryareas?
- Whatlayers makeuptheneocortex?
- Whichpartofthestriatumis involvedintherewardsystem?
- Inwhichfunctions is theamygdalainvolved?
- Whattypes ofwhitemattertracks canbedistinguished?
OverviewofimportantBroadmann areas.
53 54

MOTOR SYSTEMS
Motor systems
Questions forrepetition
Thenervous systemcanrespondtoexternalchallenges throughmusclecontraction,internal
- How many,functionallydifferentneocorticalareas areassumednowadays? adjustments toheartrateandbreathing,andsecretionofhormones inresponsetostress and
- WhichBroadmannareas areincludedinBroca's area? otherbodilyrequirements.
- Inwhichfunctions areBroadmannareas 39and40involved?
Controlofskeletalmuscles
Theskeletalmuscles areundervoluntarycontrolmostofthetime.However,insomecases,
thecontractionofthesemuscles is intheformofareflex,suchas whenweburnourfingers in
aflame.Reflexes arefasterthanthetypicalsystemofconscious control.
Inhumans,thecentralareaforthecontroloftheskeletalmuscles starts is theprimarymotor
areaofthecerebralcortex,whichis locatedintheprecentralgyrus ofthefrontallobe.Electri-
calstimulationofthemotorcortexproduces contractionofmuscles ontheoppositesideof
thebody.Thebodyparts arerepresentedupsidedownontheprecentralgyrus,withthehead
atthebottom,andthelower limbatthetop,withthemuscles ofthelegandfoot,represented
ontheextensionofthemotorcortexontothemedialsurfaceof thehemisphere.
Thesomatotopicpattern ofcontrolofmuscles in theprimarymotor cortex.Notethatthe
areas for controlofthelegandfootmuscles areon themedialsideofthecortex.
Themotorcortexis connectedtothemotorneurons ofthespinalcordbyalongpathway
calledthecorticospinaltract.Thecorticospinaltractarises fromlargepyramidalcells inthe
motorcortex.Their axons travelthroughtheinternalcapsule,cerebralpeduncle,thebasilar
pons,andthemedullarypyramidtoreachthecaudalendofthehindbrain.Atthis point,most
ofthecorticospinalfibers cross totheoppositesideinthepyramidaldecussation.Duetothat,
theymakeconnections withmotor neurons ontheoppositesideof thebodyfromtheircorti-
calorigin.
Becausethecorticospinalfiberbundles formthemedullarypyramids,thecorticospinaltract
has traditionallybeencalledthepyramidaltract.This termis insomeways unfortunatebe-
cause,bycoincidence,thecells of originofthecorticospinaltractarepyramid-shapedneu-
rons inthemotorcortex.Anotherreasontoavoidusingthetermpyramidaltractis theunfor-
55 56

tunateandnow discredited'pyramidal/extrapyramidal' concept,whichwas anearlybutmisin- tractinhumans,othernearbyareas,suchas thestriatum,arealsodamaged.Becauseofthis,
formedattempttoexplaintheorganizationofdifferentparts ofthemotorsystems. theloss offinemovementis accompaniedbyhypertonia(stiffness orspasticity)andhyper-
reflexiarelatedtostriataldamage.
Theconceptofan extrapyramidalsystembecamepopular amongneurologists inthe
early20thcentury,whoweretryingtodistinguishthemotor problems arisingfrom Theroleofnon-corticalmotorcenters –modules formotorcontrol
damagetothepyramidal(corticospinal) tractfrom other motor syndromes.Theycon- Weplanmovements conceptually,thinkinginsequences andoutcomes ratherthanjointan-
trastedthedirect(monosynaptic) projectionofthecortextomotoneurons (thepyrami- gles andcontractionofindividualmuscles.Thebraintranslates high-levelactionplans into
dalsystem)withwhattheybelievedtobeanalternativemultisynapticpathwayfrom modularsystems tomanagethecontrolofdozens of muscles neededtocarryoutaparticular
cortextomotoneurons,whichtheycalledtheextrapyramidalsystem.Theyhypothe- tasktomakethis process moreefficient.Thesemodularcontrolsystems arefoundinthebrain
sizedthatthis multisynapticpathwaywentfrom cortextostriatum andpallidum,then stemandspinalcord.Thesemodules arepre-wiredduringbraindevelopmenttoproduce
tovarious midbrainandhindbraincenters,andfinallytothespinalcord.Theproblem semi-automaticmovements likewalkingandchewing.This makes iteasierforthemotorcor-
is thatthehypothesizedchainofdescendingconnections does notexist.Itwas fa- textogetaresultwithouttheneedtoconnecttoindividualmotorneurons.Duringvertebrate
mouslydebunkedin1962byNautaandMehler.Theyshowedthattheglobus pallidus evolution,complexbehaviors andmovementsets becameorganizedinahierarchyofmod-
projects almostentirelytothethalamus rather thantothemidbrainandthehindbrain ules.Atthetopofthehierarchyaresurvivalbehaviors -eatinganddrinkingbehaviors,defen-
motor centers.Despitethis,the'extrapyramidal'conceptlives onintextbooks andin sivebehaviors,reproductivebehaviors,andmovementpatterns toexploretheimmediateenvi-
lectures givenbyneurologists. ronment.Themostimportantcenters forthecontrolofsurvivalbehaviors arelocatedinthe
hypothalamus.
Brainstemandspinalcordmodules forcontrolof complexmovements
Eachhypothalamicbehavioralorganizerconnects withmovementmodules inthebrainstem
andspinalcord.Forexample,feedingmayinvolveturningtheheadtolookaround,running
toafoodsource,reachingandgrasping,andlickingandchewing.Eachoftheseactivities is
sequencedbyaparticularpartof themidbrain,hindbrain,orspinalcord.Thehypothalamus
activates anumberofthesemovementmodules inacoordinatedprogramtoachievethede-
siredbehavior.Thebrainstemoffers modules fororientingmovements oftheheadandneck,
licking,chewing,facialexpression,vocalization,andcontrolofbreathing.Themovement
modules inthespinalcordincludethosethatcontrolposture,locomotion,reaching,and
grasping.
Anexampleofmodularcontrolatthespinalcordlevelis thewithdrawalofthelowerlimb
fromasharppaininthefoot,suchas standingonapieceofbrokenglass.Interneurongroups
ofthespinalcordentirelyhandlethis complexresponse,andthewithdrawalmovementoc-
curs beforethepainis evenregisteredinthecerebralcortex.Theprimaryresponseis topull
thefootawayfromthesourceofthepain,requiringcontractionofhipflexors (psoas andilia-
cus)andkneeflexors (hamstrings) whileinhibitingthecorrespondingextensors topermitthe
movement.Theproblemwiththis responseis thatitwillalsocauseafallunless adjustments
aremade.Themoduletakes careofthis bycontractinghipextensors,hipabductors,andknee
extensors oftheoppositelegtostabilizethebody.Inthis way,tenormoremuscles ineachleg
areeithercontractedormadetorelaxinordertoachievethewholepatternofmovement
neededtoterminateapainfulstimulus.
Thecourseofthecorticospinaltractfromthemotor cortextothespinalcord.
Damagetothecorticospinaltract
Humans whoexperienceddamagetothemotor cortex orthecorticospinaltractcannotper-
formtasks thatrequireprecisemovements of individualfingers,suchas writing,sewing,tying
knots,andpickingupsmallobjects.Less precisemovements,andthosethatinvolvelarger
musclegroups,areless severelyaffected.Whenacerebralstrokedamages thecorticospinal
57 58

Reflexactions followinga painfulinjurytotherightfoot.On theright-handside,theflexor
muscles pullthefootawayfromthepainfulstimulus,andtheextensors areinhibited.On
theleftside,theextensor muscles areactivatedtomaintain stability.
Descendingmotorcontrolpathways other thanthecorticospinaltract
As wellas sendingfibers tothespinalcordinthecorticospinaltract,themotorcortexsends
axons tothebasilarpons (corticopontinefibers)andthebrainstem(corticobulbarfibers)in Arostralcoronalsliceshowingthecaudate(Cd),putamen (Pu),andaccumbens (Acb).
ordertoconnectwiththecerebellumandbrainstemmotorcenters.Severalcenters inthe
brainstemgiverisetodescendingtracts thatendintheinterneuronpools oftheintermediate
spinalgraymatter.Thesearetherubrospinal,tectospinal,reticulospinal,andvestibulospinal
tracts,eachcontrollingdifferentaspects ofmovement.
Theroles ofthestriatumandpalliduminmotor control
Thestriatumandthepallidumarelargemasses of graymatterthatliedeeptothecerebralcor-
tex.Thestriatumconsists ofthreeparts –thecaudatenucleus,theputamen,andtheaccum-
bens nucleus.Medialtotheputameninthemainpartofthepallidum,calledtheglobus pal-
lidus.Theglobus pallidus is separatedfromthethalamus bytheinternalcapsule.
Theaccumbens nucleus lies deeptotherostralparts ofthecaudatenucleus andputamen.
Thestriatalandpallidalcenters havealongevolutionaryhistoryandcanbeclearlyidentified
inreptiles andbirds.Thestriatumandpallidumarepartofamajorforebraincircuitofcon-
nections,regulatingtheformandstyleof movements.
This circuitbegins withneurons inthemotor cortex,projectingtocells inthestriatum.Stri-
atalneurons projecttothepallidum.Thepallidumprojects tothemidbrainandthethalamus.
Thethalamicnucleus involvedthenprojects backtothecerebralcortex,alteringmovements
intheplanningstageorwhiletheyareinprogress.Thesubstantianigrais intimatelycon-
nectedwiththestriatumthroughthedopaminergicnigrostriatalpathway.
Acoronalslicethrough themiddleof thecerebrumshowingthecaudatenucleus (Cd),
putamen (Pu),andglobus pallidus (GP)andtheir relationshiptotheinternalcapsule(ic)
andthalamus (Th).
59 60

Theresultis majordisorders ofmuscletone(oftencalledspasticity) andavarietyofinvolun-
tarymovements.
Thefinalcommonpathwayforallmotorsystems –themotorneuron
Allmotorcontrolsystems actthroughthemotor neurons:thefinalpathwaytomuscles.Large
(alpha)motorneurons intheventralhornof thespinalcordactivatetheskeletalmuscles of
thelimbs andtrunk.Similaralphamotorneurons inthemidbrainandhindbrainactivatethe
voluntarymuscles ofthehead.Eachalphamotor neuronis connectedtomanyfibers ina
skeletalmuscle.Whenthealphamotor neuronfires,allof thefibers towhichitis connected
willcontract.Themotorunitis thecombinationofasinglealphamotor neuronandthemus-
clefibers towhichitconnects.Activatingalphamotorneurons is theonlywaytocauseskele-
talmusclefibers tocontract.As aresult,allthemotorcontrolsystems describedabove
achievetheir effects bystimulatingorsuppressingalphamotorneurons.TheEnglishphysiol-
ogistandNobelprizewinner,Charles Sherrington,coinedtheterm' finalcommonpathway' to
describetheroleof alphamotorneurons.
Questions forrepetition
- Of whatparts does thestriatumconsistof?
- Describethecourseof thecorticospinaltract.
- Whathappens whenthecorticospinaltractis damaged?
- How is theglobus pallidus separatedfromthethalamus?
- How is thesubstantianigraconnectedtothestriatum?
Theconnection circuitstartingfromexcitatoryglutamateneurons in theprimarymotor
cortex(GLU).ThecorticalGLU neurons projecttoGABAneurons in thestriatum.The
GABAstriatalneurons in turn projecttoGABAneurons in thepallidum.Thecircuitis
completedbytheprojection of thepallidalneurons tothethalamus andthethalamicGABA
projection backtothecortex.
This setofconnections underlies theproductionofpredeterminedmovementpatterns.Many
species areknowntohavecomplexpatterns of movementassociatedwithmatingandordis-
plays ofaggression.Itseems possiblethatthestriatal/pallidalcomplexis themaincenterfor
theinitiationofthesegeneticallydeterminedmovementpatterns.
Aninterestingfeatureofthecells of thestriatumandpallidumis thattheyinfluencethecortex
byinhibitingthalamicneurons usingtheinhibitoryneurotransmitterGABA.This makes them
verydifferentfromthecorticalneurons thatconnecttothestriatum;thesecorticalneurons re-
leasetheexcitatorytransmitter substanceglutamate.
Wedonothaveaclearideaofthepreciseroleof thestriatumandpalliduminhumans,butwe
dohaveclues fromcases inwhichtheseareas aredamaged.Thefindings aredisorders ofthe
restingtoneofmuscles,difficultystartingmovements,andunwantedinvoluntarymovements.
InParkinson's disease,theinputtothestriatumfromthesubstantianigrais damaged.There-
sultis amassiveanddisablingincreaseinmuscletone,accompaniedbytremorinthehands,
andgreatdifficultyinstartingmovements.Asevereformofdamagetothestriatumis seenin
late-stageHuntington's disease,wheretheface,trunk,andlimbs writhecontinuously.Inthe
caseofcerebralpalsy,thestriatumandpallidumarelikelydamagedinthebabybeforebirth.
61 62

SENSORY SYSTEM Dorsal column-medial lemniscus pathway
This is themaintouchpathway.Ittransmits signals fromlow-thresholdmechanoreceptors in
theskin,muscles,andjoints.This enables tactilediscrimination,vibrationdetection,and
The somatosory system
proprioception(senseofpositionfromjointandmusclereceptors).
Themaintouchpathway's first-order(primary)neurons arelocatedinthedorsalrootganglia.
Somaticsensations comefromtheskin,muscles,joints,andbones.Somaticsensations from
Theaxons oftheganglioncells carryinginformationfromthelower limbs formthegracile
theheadtraveltothebrain steminthetrigeminalnerve,whereas thosebelow theheadtravel
fasciculus,whileintheupperextremities,theyformthecuneatefasciculus.Thetwofasciculi
inspinalnerves tothespinalcord.Somaticsensations fromtheskinaretouch,deeppressure,
arecollectivelyknownas thedorsalcolumns.
pain,andtemperature.
Thedorsalcolumnaxons ascendtothehindbrain,wheretheyterminateinthegracileand
cuneatenuclei.Theaxons leavingthecells ofthegracileandcuneatenucleicross themidline
Somatosensory pathways in the spinal cord
andformacompactbundlecalledthemediallemniscus.Themediallemniscus ascends
Boththespinothalamictracts andthedorsalcolumns (gracileandcuneatefasciculi)convey
throughthebrainstemtosynapsewiththird-order neurons intheventroposteriornucleus of
somatosensoryinformationfromonesideof thebodytothecerebralcortexoftheopposite
thethalamus.Thethalamicneurons sendtheiraxons totheprimarysomatosensorycortexin
sideviathethalamus.Eachofthesesystems is basicallyachainofthreeneurons:thefirst
thepostcentralgyrus.
neuronis adorsalrootganglioncellwithits centralprocess enteringthespinalcordtoascend
forsomedistancebeforeitsynapses withthesecondneuroninthechain;theaxonofthesec-
Spinothalamic tracts
ondneuroncrosses themidlineimmediatelyandascends tothethalamus;thethirdneuron
Therearetwospinothalamictracts,lateralandventral.Informationaboutpain
sends its axonfromthethalamus tothecerebralcortex.
andtemperatureis conveyedbythelateralspinothalamictract,whiletheventral
Thepainandtemperature-sensitivefibers (spinothalamictract)cross themidlineafew seg-
spinothalamictractconveys touchsensation.Thefirst-orderneurons ofthespinothalamicsys-
ments abovethelevelatwhichtheyenter thespinalcord.Incontrast,finetouchandproprio-
temarelocatedinthespinalganglia.Theaxons of theseganglioncells enterthespinalcord
ceptionfibers (dorsalcolumn-mediallemniscus pathway)donotcross untiltheyreachthe
andascendforafew segments beforetheysynapsewithsecond-orderneurons inthesubstan-
hindbrain.
tiagelatinosaofthedorsalhorn.Theaxons ofthesecond-orderneurons cross themidlinein
theanterior whitecommissureofthespinalcordtoformthespinothalamictracts.Thecrossed
painandtemperatureneurons formthelateralspinothalamictractinthelateralcolumnofthe
spinalcord.Incontrast,thecrossedtouchneurons formtheventralspinothalamictractinthe
ventralcolumnofthespinalcord.
Thespinothalamictracts ascendalongthespinallengthandthentravelthroughthebrainstem
untiltheyreachthethalamus.Inthethalamus,theysynapsewiththird-orderneurons inthe
ventroposteriornucleus.Theaxons oftheventroposteriorthalamicneurons traveltothesoma-
tosensorycortex.
The cranial somatosensory system
Almostallcranialsomatosensoryfibers intheheadtravelinthetrigeminalnerve.Thefirst-
ordertrigeminalsensoryneurons arelocatedinthetrigeminalganglionintheskullbase.The
trigeminalganglionaxons enterthehindbrainthroughthesideofthebasilarpons.Someof
thesefibers synapseintheprincipaltrigeminalsensorynucleus,whichlies atthelevelof
entryof thetrigeminalnerve.However,manyof thefibers descendinthehindbrainforcon-
siderabledistances beforetheymakecontactwithsecond-orderneurons.Someofthedes-
cendingfibers travelas faras uppercervicalsegments beforetheysynapse.
Thedescendingtrigeminalfibers formthespinaltrigeminaltract,andthetrigeminalnuclear
groups caudaltotheprincipalnucleus arecalledthenucleus ofthespinaltrigeminaltract.
Trigeminalfibers carryingtouchsensationsynapseintheprincipalsensorynucleus andthe
rostralpartofthespinaltrigeminalnucleus.Whereas thosecarryingpainandtemperaturesen-
sationsynapseinthecaudalpartof thespinaltrigeminalnucleus.
Theaxons oftheneurons oftheprincipalsensorynucleus andthespinaltrigeminalnucleus
cross themidlineandascendtothemedialpartoftheventroposteriornucleus thalamus.The
Thespinalsomatosensorypathways.Touch anddeep pressuresensations arecarriedin the ventroposteriornucleus sends its axons totheinferiorhalfofthepostcentralgyrus.
dorsalcolumn-medicallemniscus system.Pain andtemperaturesensations arecarriedin
thespinothalamicsystem. The primary somatosensory cortex
Theprimarysomatosensorycortexis locatedinthepostcentralgyrus,inBrodmannareas 3,1,
Thedorsalcolumntracts carrytouch,deeppressure,proprioceptive,andvibrationsenseinfor- and2.Thesomatosensoryinformationreachingthepostcentralgyrus is topicallyorganized.
mationinthegracileandcuneatefasciculi-thegracilefasciculus mainlyconveys information Eachindividualregionofthebodyis representedinaseparateareaonthegyrus,withthe
fromthehindlimb.Thecuneatefasciculus conveys informationfromtheforelimb. headatthebottomandthelower limbatthetop.
63 64

The visual system
Theeyecollects visualinformationtosendtothebrain.Beforereachingtheretina,light
passes throughthecornea, aqueous humor,lens,andvitreous humor.Visualimages arefo-
cusedbythecorneaandlens beforetheyreachtheretina.Theretinais enclosedinathick
fibrous layercalledthesclera.
Theprimarysomatosensorycortex(S1),which lies in thepostcentralgyrus.
Adiagramoftheeye.
Thelightreceptorcells oftheretina,therods andcones,lieinthedeepestlayeroftheretina,
solightmustpass throughthesurfacelayers oftheretinabeforeitreaches thereceptors.
Thehumanretinais intheformofadeepcup.Its outlinerepresents aboutthree-quarters ofa
spherewithadiameterof22mm.Thehumanretinacontains about7millionconecells and
about700millionrodcells.Theconecells areconcentratedinacentralareacalledthemac-
ula.Theyareresponsibleforhighacuityandcolorvision.Thereareveryfew rodcells inthe
macula.Cones aresensitivetobrightlightandfallintothreecategories thatrespondtolight
inthespectrum's red,green,or blueparts.Therodcells donotdiscriminatebetweencolors.
Instead,theyaresensitivetodimlightandreactquicklytomovingobjects enteringthevisual
field.
Justmedialtothemaculais anareawheretheaxons leavetheretinaformingtheopticnerve.
Therearenophotoreceptors inthis area,soitcreates ablindspotontheretina,about1.5-2.0
mmindiameter.
The retinal cell layers
Thecells oftheretinaarearrangedindistinctlayers,themostprominentofwhicharethe
photoreceptorlayer,thebipolarlayer,andtheganglioncelllayer.As notedabove,the
photoreceptorlayeris thedeepestlayeroftheretina–furthestfromtheentrypathoflightrays.
Thesomatotopicallyorganizedrepresentation ofbodysensations on thepostcentralgyrus.
Thereceptorcells inthis layeraretherods andcones.Thelight-sensitiveprocesses ofthe
rods arepartlyembeddedinthepigmentedepitheliallayer.Superficialtothephotoreceptor
layer is thebipolarlayer.Thebipolar cells receiveinformationfromphotoreceptors andsend
signals toganglioncells.Amacrinecells andhorizontalcells arealsolocatedinthebipolar
Questions for repetition
layer.Thefunctionoftheamacrineandhorizontalcells is tomodulatethesignals reachingthe
bipolarcells.Theganglioncelllayer lies onthesuperficialsurfaceoftheretina.Ganglion
- What information is summarised as the somatosensory system?
cells arethelargestcells in theretinabecausetheyhavelongaxons thattraveltothebrainin
- How many neurons make up most somatosensory pathways?
theopticnerve.Theganglioncellaxons intheopticnervereachcenters inthehypothalamus
- Where do the fibers that transmit information about temperature cross?
(thesuprachiasmaticnucleus),thalamus (thelateralgeniculatenucleus),andthesuperiorcol-
- How is touch sensation transmitted from the face?
liculus ofthemidbrain.
- Which Broadmann areas does the primary somatosensory cortex com-
prise?
65 66

Thelayers oftheretina.On theleftis aphotomicrograph ofasection through theretina
with theganglion celllayer aboveandthephotoreceptor layer below.Adiagramshowing
theconnections between photoreceptors,bipolar cells,andganglion cells is on theright.
Theintrinsicnetworks oftheretinaarecapableofsignificantsignalprocessingandconsolida-
tionof information.Forexample,ganglioncells ontheedges oftheretinareceiveinformation
Adiagramshowingtherepresentation ofthevisualfields on theretina,thelateralgenicu-
fromahundredormorerodcells,thus increasingsensitivitytodimlight.Bycontrast,gan-
late,andthevisualcortex.Theoveralleffectis thattherighthalfofthevisualfieldis rep-
glioncells inthemaculaofahumanretinareceiveinputfromonlytwoorthreecones,en-
resentedin thevisualcortexandviceversa.
ablingtheretinatoresolvefinedetail.
The organization of the projection from the retina to the brain
Questions for repetition
Theganglioncellaxons fromeachofthetwohalves oftheretinaprojecttodifferentsides of
thebrain.Theaxons fromthemedial(nasal) half cross themidlinetoprojecttotheopposite
- Describethepathoflightthroughtheeye.
sideofthebrain,whereas theaxons fromthelateral(temporal)halfprojecttothesamesideof
- Whatis thecharacteristicstimulus forarod?
thebrain.
- Whatcauses theblindspot?
Becauselightreaches theretinathroughabiconvexlens,theimagereachingtheretinais re-
- Of whatlayers does theretinaconsistof?
versed.This means thatthelightreceivedfromthetemporalhalfofthevisualfieldfalls upon
- Whatis theanatomicalstructureofthevisualpathway?
thenasalparts ofeachretinaandviceversa.Theimagefromeachtemporalvisualfield(nasal
retina)crosses inthechiasmtocontinuetoreachthethalamus andcortexontheoppositeside
ofthebrain.Theimagefromeachnasalvisualfield(temporalretina)remains uncrossedand
continues toreachthethalamus andcortexof thesamesideas theretina.Theoutcomeis that
theleft-handsides ofthevisualfields of botheyes runintherightoptictract,andtheright-
handsides ofthevisualfields of botheyes runtogetherintheleftoptictract.Theoverallres-
ultis thateachvisualcortexreceives informationfromtheoppositeside's visualfields.In
otherwords,therightsideof theretinaof botheyes (temporalretinaoftherighteyeandnasal
retinaof thelefteye)projects totherightvisualcortex,andviceversa.
67 68

The auditory system
Theearcollects soundinformationtosendtothebrainviathevestibulocochlearnerve.
Theearconsists ofthreeparts:theexternalearconsistingofthepinna,theauditorycanal,and
thetympanicmembrane(eardrum);themiddleear,whichcontains thethreeauditoryossicles;
theinnerear, whichcontains thecochlea.
Insidethecochleaareneuronalreceptors groupedin astructurecalledtheorgan ofCorti.
Thecochleacontains threefluid-filledtubes,anditis themiddleoneofthese,thescalame-
dia,which houses theorgan ofCorti.Hair cells in theorgan ofCortidetectsoundvibra-
tions,andtheinformation is transmittedtothehindbrain bytheauditory(cochlear)nerve.
Thecellbodies of thecochlear nervefibers arelocatedin thespiralganglion,which is em-
beddedin thebonystructureof thecochlea.
Thecellbodies oftheauditoryreceptor neurons,whichareconnectedtotheorganofCorti,
arelocatedinthespiralganglion,whichis inthecenterofthecochlea.Eachspiralganglion
cellhas anincomingaxonprocess connectedtotheorganofCortiandanoutgoingaxonpro-
cess thattravels intheauditorynervetothebrainstem.
Soundenters theexternalear through theauditorycanalandcauses thetympanicmem-
Theauditorynerveaxons terminateinthecochlearnucleiinthehindbrain.Thecochlearnuc-
branetovibrate.This vibration is transmittedacross themiddleear bythreetinybones,the
leiprojecttothesuperiorolivarycomplex.Fromthere,theauditoryinformationis senttothe
malleus,incus,andstapes.Thestapes transmits thevibration tofluidin theinternalear,
inferiorcolliculus ofthemidbrain,whereitis furtherprocessedbeforebeingsenttotheme-
andthesevibrations eventuallyreach thecochlea.Thecochleais abonyshellthatcontains
dialgeniculatenucleus inthethalamus.Themedialgeniculateprojects totheprimaryaudit-
thesoundreceptors.Notethatthemiddleear is connectedtothebackofthethroatbyan
orycortex(A1)ontheuppersurfaceofthesuperior temporalgyrus.Theauditorypathway
air-filledcanalcalledtheEustachian tube,or pharyngotympanictube.
faithfullymaintains thefrequencymapfromthecochleatothecortexsothattheauditoryrep-
resentationthatreaches theprimaryauditorycortexis stilltonotopicallyorganized.
Thethreeauditoryossicles arenamedthemalleus,incus,andstapes.Theyformasetoflevers
Thebrainstemauditorycenters of bothsides areinterconnectedacross themidline.This bilat-
thatmechanicallytransmits soundfromthetympanicmembranetotheovalwindow ofthein-
eralnetworkallows thebraintoworkoutthepositionofanincomingsound.Becauseofthese
ner ear.Soundwaves reach theinnerear thenreachreceptorhaircells inthecochlea.The
interconnections betweenthebrainstemauditorynuclei,theprimaryauditorycortexreceives
cochleais abonycaseshapedlikeaspiralseashell.Itcontains theauditoryreceptorcells,
informationfrombothears.
whichconvertsoundinformationintonerveimpulses.
Insidethecochleararethreespiraltubes,thescalavestibuli,thescalamedia,andthescala
tympani.Eachofthesethreetubes is filledwithfluid.Thescalamediacontains theauditory
receptor apparatus (theorganof Corti),whichsits onthebasilarmembrane.Theouterhair
cells oftheorganofCortiarethereceptor cells thatareconnectedtosensoryaxons.
Theorganof Cortiis tonotopicallyorganized.Thehaircells respondtodifferentsoundfre-
quencies accordingtotheirpositioninthecochlea.Thehaircells atthebaseofthecochleare-
spondtohighfrequencies,andthehair cells attheapexofthecochlearespondtolow fre-
quencies.
69 70

The vestibular system
Thename'vestibular' comes fromthevestibule,whichis asmallbonyspaceintheinnerear
inwhichthevestibularreceptors arelocated.Thevestibuleis nexttothecochlea,andthetwo
structures together arehousedinthebonylabyrinthof theinnerear.
Themainfunctions ofthevestibular systemaretomaintainbalanceandcoordinateeye
movementwiththeheadandbodyposition.Thesefunctions aremanagedatareflexlevel,
with
constantadjustments beingmadetoposturalmuscles andeyemovement.Inputfromthe
vestibularsystemenables theeyes totrackanobjectofinterest,evenwhenthebodymoves
unpredictably.Eyemovementcoordinationuses anetworkthatinterconnects thevestibular
systemwiththevisualsystem,thecerebellum,thespinalcord,andthemotorneurons that
controltheeyemuscles.
As wellas controllingthis complexreflexnetwork,thevestibular systemsupplies information
tothecerebralcortexaboutthebody's positioninspace.This helps togiveus aconscious ap-
preciationof thepositionofthebodyinspace.Thesomatosensorysystemalsoprovides vital
informationonbodypositionthatcontributes toourabilitytomaintainpostureandbalance.
Someofthepositionsenseinformationfromthesomatosensorysystemcomes fromtouchre-
ceptors intheskinanddeeppressurereceptors inthefeet.
The semicircular canals
Thevestibulecontains twoquiteseparatesystems forgatheringinformationonheadposition.
Onesystem,basedonthesemicircularcanals,detects movementof theheadinanydirection.
Incontrast,theothersystem,basedonthesacculeandutriclesystem,is designedtoregister
thepositionoftheheadwhenitis notmoving.Therefore,thesemicircularcanalsystemcan
bedescribedas thedynamicvestibularsystem,andthesaccule/utriclesystemcanbede-
scribedas thestaticvestibularsystem.
Theauditorypathwayfromthecochleatotheprimaryauditorycortex(A1).
Ganglion cells in thespiralganglion receiveinformation fromtheorgan ofCorti,andthis
information is transmittedcentrallytothecochlear nuclei.Each cochlear nucleus is con-
nectedtoneurons in thesuperior olivarynucleiofboth sides.Thesuperior olivarynuclei
sendaxons totheinferior colliculus ofthemidbrain,which is in turn connectedtotheme-
dialgeniculatenucleus ofthethalamus.Thegeniculatemedicalprojects totheprimary
auditorycortex
Questions for repetition
- How is theinnerearstructured?
- Inwhichanatomicalstructurearethesensoryreceptors forthe"soundwaves" embedded?
- Whatis theanatomicalstructureoftheauditorypathway?
- Whichthalamicnucleus is involvedintheauditorypathway?
Overviewofthevestibular system.
71 72

Semicircular canals
Thesemicircularcanals arethreealmostcircular tubes containingafluidcalledendolymph.
Endolymphis alsofoundin thecochlearductincontactwithauditoryhaircells.Eachsemi-
circularcanalis placedinadifferentspatialplane–onehorizontal,oneverticalclosetothe
sagittalplane,andoneverticalclosetothecoronalplane.Nomatterwhatdirectionthehead
moves in,itwillcausefluidtomovearoundinoneor moreofthethreecanals.Eachcanalhas
awidenedareacalledtheampulla,whichcontains sensitivehaircells.Theprocesses ofthe
haircells areembeddedin apieceof jellycalledthecupula.Whenthefluidmoves inresponse
toheadmotion,thecupulais draggedinthedirectionoffluidmovement,twistingthepro-
cesses ofthehaircells.Thetwistinggenerates anelectricalsignal,whichis carriedtothe
hindbrainbythevestibularnerve.
Schematicoverviewof thevestibular pathways.
Saccule and utricle
Thesaccule-utriclesystemis containedinapair ofrecesses inthevestibule.Thesacculeand
utricleeachhaveapatchofhaircells calledamacula.Theprocesses ofthesehaircells are
embeddedinaplateofjelly,as arethoseofthesemicircularcanals,butinthis case,thejelly
contains calciumcarbonatecrystals calledotoliths.Thecalcium-containingjellyplateis
calledtheotolithmembrane.Whentheheadis stationary,theweightofthecalcium-filledoto-
liths pulls thehair cells undertheinfluenceofgravity,andthis,inturn,causes thehaircells to
bestimulated.Otherexternalforces suchas rapidaccelerationcanalsostimulatethehaircells
inthemacula.Thereceptorclusters ofthesacculeandutriclearesetatrightangles toeach
othersothattheycanestablishthehead's positionatalltimes.Themaculaofthesacculeis set
Thehair cells ofeach semicircular canalarelocatedin theampulla.Theciliaofthehair intheverticalplane,soitis bestplacedtodetectflexionandextensionmovements ofthe
cells detectthemovementoftheendolymph.Theinformation gatheredbythehair cells is head.Themaculaoftheutricleis setinthehorizontalplane,soitis bestplacedtodetectlat-
gatheredbytheaxons ofthevestibular ganglion cells.Thevestibular ganglion cells areun- eraltiltingofthehead.Theinformationgatheredbythereceptors ofthesacculeandutricleis
usualin thattheyaretruebipolar ganglion cells,notpseudounipolar cells as in theso- carriedtothehindbrainbythevestibularnerve.
matosensoryandauditorysystems.Thecentralaxon ofthevestibular ganglion cellcon-
nects with thevestibular nucleiin thehindbrain.
73 74

Vestibular nuclei Olfaction
Thevestibularnucleiofthehindbrainoccupyalargeareainthefloorofthefourthventricle.
Theyarestronglyconnectedwiththecerebellum,thespinalcord,andwiththesystemthat Inmostmammals,thesenseofsmell(olfaction)plays acriticalroleinrecognizingpredators,
controls eyemovement.Thevestibularconnectiontotheneckandeyemuscles ensures that partners,andoffspring.Theolfactorysystemhas becomeless importantinhumans because
headandeyepositions areconstantlylinkedtogether.Themediallongitudinalfasciculus is werelyonahighlydevelopedvisualsystem.However,itis notoftenrealizedthatagreatdeal
thebrainstempathwaylinkingtheeyemusclenucleiandthevestibularnuclei.Thecloserela- ofwhatwecalltasteis actuallybasedonolfactorysignals.Whenwehaveanasalinfection,
tionshipbetweenthevestibular receptors andeyemovementcanbedemonstratedbyspinning andtheolfactoryreceptors areinjuredorblocked,weloseabout90%of ourabilitytoappre-
someonearound.Ifyousitsomeoneinarotatingofficechairandspinthemaroundtentimes ciateflavors.Inmanyanimals,olfactoryinputtotheamygdalacaninitiateemotionalre-
atamoderatespeed,thenstopthemabruptly,youwillseetheeyes flickfromsidetosideina sponses,includingaggression.
movementcallednystagmus.Theeyemovementhappens becausethefluidinthehorizontal Theolfactoryepitheliumof thenasalcavityconverts informationonodors intocodedneural
semicircularcanalis stillmovingwhenthechair stops moving,andtheeyemusclecontrol signals.Olfactoryreceptorneurons intheroofofthenosearesubjecttocontinualdamage,
systemthinks thattheheadis stillmoving.Itthereforeresponds withtheside-to-sidemove- andinrodents,theyhaveanaveragelifespanofonly40days.Becauseof
mentoftheeyes.Thesubjectwillalsocomplainthattheroomseems tobespinningaround this,theyhavetobeconstantlyreplenishedfromstemcells.Eacholfactoryreceptorneuron
them;this sensationis calledvertigo. sends anunmyelinatedaxonthroughholes intheethmoidboneintheroof ofthenoseto
Itis crucialtodistinguishthesensationof vertigofromdizziness.Dizziness is afeelingofun- reachtheolfactorybulb.
steadiness,whileinvertigo,theworldseems tobemovingaroundyou.Vertigois oftenac-
companiedbyfeelings ofnauseaandmaybeassociatedwithvomitinginseverecases.
Vestibulospinal tracts
Twoimportantdescendingtracts arisefromthevestibularnuclei–theuncrossedlateral
vestibulospinaltract,which reaches allspinalcordlevels,andthecrossedmedialvestibu-
lospinaltract,whichends inthecervicalspinalcord.Themedial
vestibulospinaltractis primarilyresponsivetoinputfromthesemicircularcanals,anditcon-
nects withtheneckmuscles tocontrolheadposition.Thelateralvestibulospinaltractis
mainlyresponsivetoinformationfromthesacculeandutricle;its primaryroleis toadjust
postureinthelimbs andtrunkbyactivatingextensormuscles tomaintainbalance.
Vestibular representation in the cerebral cortex
Whilethemainfunctionofthevestibularsystemis theautomaticcontrolof
bodyandeyeposition,thecerebralcortexreceives vestibularinformation
,whichcontributes toaconscious perceptionof bodyposition.Themain
areareceivingvestibularinformationinmonkeys is locatedbetweentheventral
partoftheprimarysomatosensorycortexandtheinsula.Itis assumedthat
anequivalentareaexists inhumans.Becausetheprimarysomatosensory
cortexis inthepostcentralgyrus of theparietallobe,this areais referredtoas
theparietal-insularvestibular cortex.Theinputtothis areais notexclusivelyvestibular;it
alsoreceives informationfromthevisualsystemandfromposition-sensereceptors inthe
neck.
Themain olfactoryprojection is diagrammaticallyshown on theleftofthepicture.Fibers
fromtheolfactorybulbtravelin theolfactorytracttoreach theprimaryolfactorycortex
Questions for repetition (piriformcortex),theentorhinalcortex,andpartof theamygdala.Therightsideofthedia-
gramshows theaccessoryolfactorypathway,which does notexistin humans butis an im-
- Whatarethetwosystems for determiningheadposition? portantstructurein manymammals.
- Whatarethedifferences betweenthesetwosystems?
- Whichbrainstempathwayconnects thecontroloftheeyemuscles andthevestibularnu- Inadditiontothemainolfactorysystem,manymammals (butnothumans)haveasecondol-
clei? factorysystemconcernedwithdetectingpheromones.Pheromones aresignalingchemicals re-
- Whatis theprimaryfunctionof thelateralvestibulospinaltract? leasedintotheenvironmenttocausebehavioralchanges innearbyindividuals.Insects use
pheromones tosignalawiderangeofsituations,includingsexualreadiness,alarm,andto
markatrail.Mostmammals haveasmallpheromonedetectingsystemcalledtheaccessory
olfactorysystem.Itis primarilyrelatedtosexualsignaling.This systemis notpresentinhu-
mans.
Thepheromone-sensitiveareainthenoseis calledthevomeronasalorgan.Removalofthe
vomeronasalorganinjuvenilemalemicedoes notimpair food-findingabilities butdoes
75 76

impair theirabilitytorecognizesexualsignals frompotentialmates.Axons ofreceptorneur-
ons inthevomeronasalorganprojectexclusivelytotheaccessoryolfactorybulb(AOB)adja-
centtothemainolfactorybulb.Theoutputoftheaccessoryolfactorybulbis toaspecialnuc-
leus superficialtotheamygdala,calledthebednucleus oftheaccessoryolfactorytract.
Projections from the olfactory receptors to the brain
Nervefibers connectedtotheolfactoryreceptor cells intheroofofthenoseformtwelveto
twentyolfactorynervebundles.Thesenervebundles travelthroughaseries ofbonycanals in
theethmoidbonetoreachtheolfactorybulbontheventralsideofthefrontallobe.Because
theolfactorysystemis anextensionoftheforebrainandnotatypicalnerve,itis surrounded
bymeninges andcerebrospinalfluid.Fractures of thebonyroofofthenosecanthereforeres-
ultinmeningealtears andcerebrospinalfluidleakage.Thefluidleaks outthroughthenose,
andthemeningealtearcan resultinpotentiallyfatalbacterialinfectioninthecerebrospinal
fluidspacearoundthebrain.
Fibers of theolfactorybulbcontinuetoformtheolfactorytract,whichlies inagrooveonthe
ventralsurfaceofthefrontallobe.Theolfactorytractends bydividingintoamedialandalat-
eralbranch.Thelargerlateralbranch(calledthelateralolfactorytract)ends mainlyinthe
primaryolfactorycortex.Theprimaryolfactorycortexis traditionallycalledthepiriformcor-
tex.Inhumans,theprimaryolfactorycortexis locatedinagyrus calledtheuncus.Theuncus
is themostrostralpartoftheparahippocampalgyrus ofthemedialsideofthetemporallobe.
Theuncus sits onthemedialsurfaceoftheamygdalaandis rostraltothehippocampus.
Someolfactorytractfibers cross intheanterior commissurepathwaytoconnectoneolfactory
bulbtothatoftheoppositeside.
Thebloodsupplytotheuncus canbecutoff duringadifficultbirthwhenpressureonthehead
duringlaborpushes thetemporallobeagainsttheduralroofofthecerebellum.This candam-
agetheunderlyingamygdalaandmayresultinanatypicalformofepilepsylaterinlife,called Theolfactory(piriform)cortexis in agyrus calledtheuncus.Itlies attherostraltipofthe
temporallobeepilepsyoruncinateepilepsy. parahippocampalgyrus ofthetemporallobe.Theolfactorycortexis superficialtotheamy-
gdalaandis rostraltothehippocampus.Theworduncus means ahook,which describes
Theolfactoryventricleis asmallspacefilledwithcerebrospinalfluidinthemiddleoftheol- theshapeofthis smallgyrus.
factorybulb.Itis formedfromanextensionof thelateralventricle.Inrodents,anareadirectly
under thelateralventricle,thesubventricular zone,produces stemcells thatmigrateforward
fromthelateralventricleintotheolfactorybulb.Theyprovideacontinualsourceofnew
neurons fortheolfactorysystemthroughoutadultlife.This cellgroupis calledtherostralmi- Questions for repetition
gratorystream.Therostralmigratorystreamandthehippocampus aretheonlyplaces where
postnatalneurogenesis occurs inthebrain.Arostralmigratorystreamhas beenshowninthe - Which sense is extremely closely related to the sense of smell?
postnatalhumanbrain,butitis relativelysmallandbecomes evensmalleras thebrainma- - How can mammals also perceive pheromones?
tures. - Is the olfactory nerve built like a peripheral nerve?
- What is the primary olfactory cortex in humans called?
- Are the receptor neurons of the sense of smell a stable tissue?
77 78

Taste THE AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
Tastereceptors inthetonguesendinformationviathefacialandglossopharyngealnerves to
The autonomic nervous system (ANS)
thehindbrain.Thetastereceptors of theanterior two-thirds ofthetongueareconnectedwith
sensoryfibers ofthefacialnerve.Thetastereceptors oftheposteriorthirdofthetongueare
Theeffector systems thatcontroltheinternalorgans,glands,andbloodvessels arecollec-
connectedwithsensoryfibers of theglossopharyngeal.Notsurprisingly,thefacialandglos-
tivelycalledtheautonomicmotorsystembecausemostoftheir functions areautomaticand
sopharyngealnerves alsocontrolthesalivaryglands.Theglossopharyngealnervesupplies the
involuntary.Theycanalsobecalledthevisceralmotorsystemtodistinguishitfromtheso-
largeparotidgland,andthefacialsupplies thesmallersubmandibularandsublingualglands
maticmotorsystemthatcontrols thevoluntarymuscles.Theautonomicmotorsystemis di-
withparasympatheticsecretomotor fibers.
videdintosympatheticand parasympatheticgroups basedonfunctionandanatomy.Thesym-
Thetastesensoryfibers inthefacialandglossopharyngealnerves formadistinctbundleinthe
patheticgroupis involvedinthecontrolof thearterialsystemandemergency(fightorflight)
hindbraincalledthesolitarytract,whichlies betweenthedorsalnucleus ofthevagus andthe
responses.Incontrast,theparasympatheticgroupcontrols thenormalday-to-dayfunctions of
spinalvestibularnucleus.Thehindbraintastenucleus surroundingthesolitarytractis called
theinternalorgans,suchas salivationanddigestion. Finally,thelocalneuronnetworks which
thenucleus ofthesolitarytract.
coordinatetheactions ofthestomachandintestines areoftengroupedunderthenameenteric
nervous system.
Locationofthesympatheticandparasympatheticmotorcenters
Whereas themotor neurons thatsupplythevoluntarymuscles arefoundinallregions ofthe
brainstemandspinalcord,theautonomicmotorcenters occupyonlyrestrictedareas:the
sympatheticmotorcenters areonlylocatedinthoracicandupper lumbarspinalcordsegments
(T1toL2),andtheparasympatheticmotorcenters areonlyfoundinthebrainstemandinthe
sacralspinalcord.Thecervicalspinalcord,thecoccygealspinalcord,andmostofthelumbar
spinalcordcontainneithersympatheticnorparasympatheticmotorcenters.Therestrictedori-
ginofthesympatheticandparasympatheticmotorsystems poses achallengefordistribution
sinceeachsystemmustsupplystructures fromheadtotail.Thesympatheticandparasympa-
theticsystems possess differentsolutions todistributetheiractivitytoallappropriateparts of
thebody.
Thesympatheticsystemarises fromspinalnervesT2toL2,butitspreads its influence
throughthesympatheticchain,whichextends fromthebaseoftheskulltothepelvis.The
parasympatheticsystemhas its origins inthebrainstemandthesacralspinalcord.Therefore,
its solutionis throughthelongcourseofthevagus nerve,whichsupplies thoracicandabdom-
inalviscerafromthenecktothepelvis.Inthepelvis,itmeets thesacralparasympatheticout-
flow fromsacralnerves 2,3,and4.
Thesolitarytractstands outin this hindbrain section becauseitis madeupofdark-stained
myelinatedfibers in an otherwisecellular areaoccupiedbycranialnervenuclei(arrow).
Thenucleus ofthesolitarytractprojects tothemedialpartoftheventroposteriornucleus of
thethalamus andthetasteinformationis thensentfromthethalamus totheinsularcortexand
thefrontaloperculum.
Thetastereceptors inthetonguehaveonlyalimitedrangeofperception(salt,sweet,sour,
bitter,andumami),andmuchofwhatwethinkofas 'taste' is actuallybasedoninformation
fromtheolfactorysystem.Odors fromfoodinthemouthreachtheolfactoryreceptors inthe
roofofthenose.Theimportanceoftheolfactoryinformationinappreciatingthetasteoffood
becomes obvious whenan infectionblocks olfactoryreceptioninthenose,suchas happens
withthecommoncold.Withnoolfactoryreception,foodseems tolosealmostallits taste.
Questions for repetition
- Whichnerves innervatethetastecells of thetongue?
- Whatis thenameofthefusionofthenervefibers ofthetastecellinnervatingnerves?
- Whycanwetasteworsewhenwehaveacold?
79 80

Sympatheticdistribution
Thepreganglionicsympatheticneurons arefoundonlyinthemiddleregionofthespinalcord,
fromthesecondthoracicsegmenttothefirstlumbar segment.Distributiontomorerostraland
caudalareas ofthebodyis achievedbytheexistenceofthesympatheticchain–alongsystem
ofnerves thatruns alongsidethebodies of thevertebrae.Thesympatheticmotorgangliaare
embeddedinthis chain,withapproximatelytwentygangliaoneachside.Fromtheganglia,
postganglionicsympatheticfibers aredistributedtoalllevels oftheheadandtrunkandalsoto
thelimbs.
Functions of theparasympatheticnervous system
Theparasympatheticnervous systemis responsibleforthenormalday-to-dayfunctions ofthe
internalorgans (arolewhichcanbedescribedas 'restanddigest').Parasympatheticactions on
thecardiovascularsystemareoppositetothoseofthesympatheticnervous system;the
parasympatheticoutflow lowers theheartrateandbloodpressure.Theparasympatheticner-
vous systemdoes notsendnerves tothelimbs,soits roleis restrictedtotheglands andorgans
oftheheadandtrunk.Itis alsoresponsibleforpenileerectionandbladderemptying.
Parasympatheticdistribution
Thecranialparasympatheticnerves supplythepupilandciliarymuscle(oculomotornerve),
smallsecretoryglands oftheeyeandnose,smallsalivaryglands (facialnerve),theparotid
gland(glossopharyngealnerve),andorgans oftheneck,thoraxandabdomen(thevagus
nerve).Thevagus parasympatheticsupplygoes tothelarynx,esophagus,lungs,heart,stom-
Adiagramshowingthedistribution ofthesympatheticnervous system(in red)andthedis- ach,andthesmallandlargeintestines.Thesacralpreganglionicneurons supplyeffectorneu-
tribution oftheparasympatheticnervous system(in blue). rons inthesigmoidcolon,rectum,bladder,andgenitalia.
Autonomicganglia Transmittersubstances intheautonomicnervous system
Inthesomaticmotoroutflow,asinglemotor neuronconnects thebrainstemorspinalcordto Allsympatheticandparasympatheticpreganglionicmotorneurons arelikesomaticmotor
atargetmuscle,whereas,intheautonomicnervous system,themotoroutflow is formedbya neurons inthattheyuseacetylcholineas their transmittersubstance.Theparasympathetic
two-neuronchain.Thefirstautonomicmotor neuroninthechainis locatedinsidethebrain- ganglionicneurons arealsocholinergic.However,thesympatheticganglioniceffectorneu-
stemor spinalcord;itsends its axontoasecondeffectorneuronlocatedinaganglionoutside rons arenoradrenergic.
ofthecentralnervous system.Theaxonofthesecond neurontheninnervates thetargetorgan.
Thetwo-neuronsystemenables asingleautonomicmotorneurontotriggerhundreds ofgan-
glioniceffectorneurons,producingwidespreadeffects,suchas arterialconstrictiontoraise
bloodpressure. Higherautonomiccontrol
Becausethesecondmotorneurons intheautonomicchainareclusteredtogetheringanglia, Themotorneurons oftheautonomicnervous systemareregulatedbycenters inthehypothal-
thefirstneuronis calledpreganglionic,andthesecondneuronis calledganglionic.Inthecase amus andbrainstem.Thesecenters controlvitalfunctions ofthecardiovascularandrespira-
ofthesympatheticnervous system,thegangliaareclosetothespinalcord,sothepregan- torysystems,as wellas salivation,swallowing,digestionperistalsis,defecation,andurina-
glioniccells haveonlyshortaxons,andtheganglionicneuronaxons arelong.Inthecaseof tion.Atalevelabovethebrainstem,thehypothalamus triggers theseautonomicfunctional
theparasympatheticnervous system,themotorgangliaarelocatedveryclosetothetargetor- centers as partofmoresignificantbehavioralresponses,suchas thoseinvolvedinaggression.
gans (someareevenembeddedinthewalls ofthetargetorgans),andsotheaxons ofthepre- Anger is associatedwithincreases inheartrate,bloodpressure,andrespiratoryrate.
ganglioniccells areoftenrelativelylong,andtheganglionicaxons areveryshort.
Theentericnervous system(ENS)
Functions ofthesympatheticnervous system Thenetworks ofneurons embeddedinthewallofthegut,whichregulateandcoordinateits
Thesympatheticnervous systemis oftendescribedas afightorflightsystem.Itrapidlymobi- activity,arecalledtheentericnervous system.This subdivisionoftheautonomicnervous sys-
lizes criticalbodilysystems intimes ofemergencyor stress,preparingthebodyforactionby temdeserves auniquenamebecauseitis solarge.Inhumans,itcontains 200-600million
raisingbloodpressure,relaxingandopeningairways, mobilizingenergysources,andtempo- neurons,morethanintheentirespinalcord.Theentericnervous systemcontrols thecontrac-
rarilyshuttingdowndigestion.Mostimportantly,itincreases bloodflow tomuscles byshut- tions andsecretions ofthestomach,intestines,andotherdigestiveorgans.Althoughthecen-
tingdownbloodflow totheskinandintestines. tralautonomicnervous systeminfluences theENS,itis capableofindependentactionthrough
Thesympatheticnervous systemcanincreaseits influenceoverthebloodvessels ofthebody its ownreflexsystems.Theentericnervous systemis alsofunctionallylinkedtothebody's
bytriggeringthereleaseofadrenalineandnoradrenalinefromtheadrenalmedulla.Thesetwo immunesystemtohelpdefendagainstinvasivemicroorganisms inthegut.Inmanyways,the
hormones haveessentiallythesameeffectas thepostganglionicsympatheticnerves,butbe- entericnervous systemseems tobeevolutionarilyolderthanthecentralnervous system,pre-
causetheyremaininthebloodstream,thesehormones amplifyandprolongthesympathetic sumablybecausefoodintakeanddigestionarepriorities forsimpleorganisms.
actions andcaninfluencecells thatarenotdirectlyinnervatedbysympatheticnerves.
81 82

Theentericnervous systemuses abouttwentydifferenttransmittersubstances,themostim- BLOOD SUPPLY TO THE BRAIN
portantof whichareacetylcholine,vasoactiveintestinalpolypeptide(VIP),nitricoxide(NO),
GABA,andserotonin.Complexnetworks intheentericnervous systemcanlearntoadaptto
The blood supply to the brain
challenges intheabsenceofCNS control.InHirschsprung's disease,thereis acongenitalab-
senceofparasympatheticinnervationof thesigmoidcolon,whichmakes thesuffererunable
todefecate.Treatmentconsists of removalofthenon-innervatedregionofthecolon.Abouta
Arterialsupply
yearafter removingthedenervatedsection,theremainingcolonlearns todefecate.
Thearterialsupplytothebraincomes fromtwointernalcarotidarteries atthefrontandtwo
vertebralarteries attheback.Eachinternalcarotidarterydivides intoalargermiddlecerebral
arteryandasmalleranteriorcerebralartery.Thetwovertebralarteries jointoformthebasilar
Questions forrepetition artery,which supplies thebrainstem.Thebasilararterydivides toformthetwoposterior
cerebralarteries.Thecarotidandbasilarsystems arelinkedtogetherbysmallcommunicating
- How cantheautonomicnervous systembesubdivided? arteries toformanarterialcircle(thecircleofWillis)atthebaseofthebrain.
- Withinwhichspinalcordsegments arethesympatheticmotorfibers located?
- How arethesympatheticganglialocatedinrelationtothespinalcordandeffectororgan?
- Namethreefunctions ofthesympatheticandparasympatheticnervous systems.
- Namethreeneurotransmitters thatplayaroleintheentericnervous system.
ThearterialcircleofWillis is formedbythetwoposterior cerebralarteries (branches ofthe
basilar artery)andbranches oftheinternalcarotidartery(themiddlecerebralartery,
anterior cerebralartery.Theposterior andanterior communicatingarteries completethe
circle.
Themiddlecerebralarterysupplies mostof thelateralsurfaceofthecerebralcortex.The
anteriorcerebralarterysupplies themedialsideofthefronthalf ofthecortexandastrip
aroundtheanteriorandsuperiormarginofthelateralcortex.Theposteriorcerebralartery
supplies mostoftheoccipitallobe,includingthevisualcortex.
Thethreemaincerebralarteries senddeepperforatingbranches todeepcerebralstructures
(suchas theinternalcapsule)beforereachingtheircorticalbranches.
83 84

The arterial supply to the lateral cerebrum by the middle cerebral artery (red), the anterior
cerebralartery(green),andtheposterior cerebralartery(blue).
Venous drainageofthebrain
Theveinsofthecerebrumendinduralvenoussinusesthatsurroundthebrain.Theduralsinuses
areembeddedintheduramater,andtheydrainintotheinternaljugularvein.
The venous sinuses also drain the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) into the bloodstream. The CSF is
absorbedintothevenoussinusesthrougharachnoidgranulations,whichareevaginationsofthe
arachnoid mater. The most prominent dural sinuses are the superior sagittal sinus, the inferior
sagittalsinus, theoccipitalsinus,andthetransversesinus.
Venous drainage of the brain. The superior sagittal sinus collects blood from the lateral
aspectofthecerebralhemispheres.Thesuperiorsagittalsinusformstwotransversesinuses,
which drain into the internal jugular vein. The Inferior sagittal sinus forms the straight
sinus,which joins thejunction of thesuperior sagittalandtransversesinuses.
Questions forrepetition
- Whicharteries formtheCircleofWillis?
- Thespeechcenters areinthesupplyareaofwhichlargerartery?
- Whatarethestructures calledinwhichthespinalfluidis absorbedintothevenous si-
nuses?
85 86

THE CIRCULATION OF CEREBROSPINAL FLUID Themainpartofthechoroidplexus lies inthemedialwallof thebodyandtheinferiorhornof
thelateralventricle.Nevertheless,groups ofchoroidplexus cells arepresentintheroofofthe
The cerebrospinal fluid and its circulation thirdventricleandtheroofofthelowerhalfofthefourthventricleas well.Ifcerebrospinal
Thebrainand spinalcordaresurroundedbythreemeningeallayers–athickdurallayernextto fluidcirculationis blocked,CSF willaccumulateintheventricularsystemofthecerebral
thebone,athinarachnoidlayer deeptothedura,andathinpiallayeronthesurfaceofthe hemispheres.Graduallythecerebralventricles willbeforcedtoexpand,andcells inthe
brainandspinalcord.Thespacebetweenthearachnoidandthepia(thesubarachnoidspace) cerebralcortexwillbekilledbycompression.This conditionis knownas hydrocephalus.
is filledwithaclearliquidcalledcerebrospinalfluid(CSF).Thesoftstructureofthebrain
Theblood-brainbarrierandthecircumventricularorgans
makes itvulnerabletomechanicaldamage;therefore,thecerebrospinalfluidacts as ashock
Theblood-brainbarrierprevents particularmolecules inthebloodstreamfromreachingthe
absorber toprotectitagainstinjury.
brain's tissues.This systemhelps protectthebrainfrombacteria,viruses,andchemicaltoxins
thatcouldcausedamage.Theblood-brainbarrieris createdbymembranespecializations in
thewalls oftheendothelialcells ofthebraincapillaries.Water-solublemolecules cannotpass
throughthecellularmembraneoftheendothelialcells andsoareunabletoreachtheextracel-
lularfluidofthebraintissues.However,smalllipid-solublemolecules cantravelthroughthe
membrane–afactorthatpromptedthedevelopmentoflipid-solubledrugs toreachthebrain.
Theblood–brainbarrieris notpresentinthecircumventricularorgans of thebrain.Theseare
small,specializedareas in thewalls ofthethirdandfourthventricles.Neurons intheventricu-
larorgans areabletomonitor thelevels ofcertainchemicals inthebloodstream.
Questions forrepetition
-Whereisthespinalfluidformed?
-Describetheflowofspinalfluid.
-Inwhichareascanneuronsobtaininformationaboutchemicalcomponentsoftheblood?
Overviewoftheventricular system;HenryGray(1918)AnatomyoftheHuman Body.
Circulation
TheCSF is manufacturedinsidethebrainbythechoroidplexuses ofthebrainventricularsys-
tem.Theventricularsystemof thecerebrumconsists oftwolateralventricles -oneinside
each cerebralhemisphere.Thelateralventricles drain intothethirdventricle,anarrow slit
betweenthetwohalves ofthehypothalamus andthalamus.TheCSF thentravels alongathin
tubeinthemidbraincalled theaqueduct.Theaqueductdrains intothefourthventricle,
betweenthecerebellumandthehindbrain.Finally,thefluidescapes throughthreeholes inthe
roofofthefourthventricletoreachthesubarachnoidspace.Cerebrospinalfluidis reabsorbed
intothebloodcirculationbyspecializedstructures in thewalls oflargeveins thatlinethein-
sideoftheskull.
87 88

STAINING AND IMAGING
Staining and imaging - Fundamentals
Informationaboutthedetailedstructureof thebrainandspinalcordcanbegatheredfromthe
microscopicstudyofthinsections thathavebeenstainedtoshow thepresenceofnervecells
andtheirprocesses.
Cutting thin sections
Thinsections canbecutfromfreshbraintissuethathas beenfrozen,butinmostcases,brain
sections arecollectedfrombraintissuethathas beenpreservedwithafixativechemicallike
formalin.Thinsections arecutwithamicrotome–aspecialslicingmachinecuttingsections
rangingfrom5to100micrometers (µm) inthickness. Formalin-fixedtissueis usuallypre-
paredfor sectioningbyembeddingitinparaffinwaxorcelloidin,butitcanalsobefrozenbe-
foresectioning.
Staining brain sections Acoronalsection ofhuman brain stemstainedwith theWeigertmethodfor myelin.Large
tracts likethepyramids andthemediallemniscus stain darkly,whereas cellular areas like
Thetwoclassicstainingmethods aretheNisslstainforstainingneuroncellbodies andstains
theinferior oliveareunstained.
formyelinatedaxons.Nisslstains useavarietyof dyes,suchas thioninandcresylviolet,to
revealdetails ofthecellbodyandnucleus ofneurons andglia.TheNisslstainis mostintense
innucleoliandintheroughendoplasmicreticulumofneurons. The Golgi method
AdisappointingfeatureofNisslstains is thattheyonlyshow thepresenceofneuronalcell
bodies.However,CamilloGolgibrilliantlysolvedthis problemattheendofthenineteenth
century.Golgidevelopedaremarkablesilver stainthatrevealeddetails ofdendrites andaxons
andcellbodies.Thecells andtheirprocesses arestainedblackagainstagoldenbackground.
TheGolgistainwas sousefulbecauseitonlystains aboutonepercentoftheneurons inthe
sectionbeingexaminedsothatindividualneurons canbeseeninisolation.Ifallneurons were
stained,theimagewouldbesolidblack.Theuseofthis stainlaunchedarevolutionintheun-
derstandingofbrainanatomypioneeredbytheSpaniardRamonyCajal.
In this Nissl-stainedsection ofrathippocampus,someneurons arepackedtightlytogether,
sotheyseemtoformacontinuous lineofvioletcolor.In other areas,cells can beseen like
grains of sandscatteredover theimage.Itis impossibletodistinguish between smallneur-
ons andgliaatthis magnification clearly.
Stains thatshow thepresenceof myelinhavebeenverywidelyusedinthestudyofhuman
brains for overacentury.Thestains canbeappliedto histologicalsections andthickslices of
This is athicksection ofthecerebralcortexstainedwith theGolgimethod.Thestain shows
thehumanbrain.Themyelinstains mostcommonlyusedaretheWeigertorLuxolfastblue
details ofthecellbody,dendrites,andaxon ofalargepyramidalcellin thelower halfofthe
methods.
image.
Untilthemiddleofthetwentiethcentury,almostallthatwas learnedaboutbrainstructure
camefromthestudyofGolgi-stainedsections.Thenextphaseofneuroanatomicalresearch
was launchedbyusinghistochemicalstains andmethods fortracingneuronalconnections.
Histochemical staining
Histochemicalstains areusedtomarkspecificcellular components ofneurons orglia,fol-
lowedbyapplyingdyes attractedtothemarkedelements.Manyhistochemicalmethods are
89 90

aimedatdetectingthepresenceof enzymes,andthesetechniques usuallyworkbestonun-
fixedorlightlyfixed
sections inwhichtheenzymes areundamaged.
Acetylcholinesterase(AChE) staininguses s-acetylthiocholineiodideandethopropazineto
depositabrownproductwherevertheacetylcholinesteraseenzymeis presentandactive.
Sincemany
neurons havereceptors foracetylcholine,this techniquecanbeusedtocharacterize
regions ofstrongcholinergicactivityanddifferentiatebetweendifferentareas inthebrain.
Motorneurons containlargeamounts of acetylcholinesterase,andtheAChEstainis veryef-
fectiveinshowingtheirdistributioninthebrainstemandspinalcord.
ThevalueofAChEstainingcanbeseenintheadjacentAChEsectionofthehippocampus ina
ratbrainsection.Thestainreveals aremarkablelevelofdetailinthelayers andsub-layers of
thehippocampus.
This is acoronalsection ofratbrain stainedwith theTimm-Danscher method.Thedark
silver deposits showtheregions thatcontain high concentrations ofzinc.
Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemicalstains useantibodies todetectthepresenceofparticularproteins in
neurons.
Asection ofratbrain stainedtoshowthepresenceoftheenzymeacetylcholinesterasein the
Themainchallengeforimmunohistochemistryis ensuringthatantibodies onlybindtothe
hippocampus
proteinofinterestandnootherrelatedproteins.Calcium-bindingproteins (suchas calbindin,
calretinin,andparvalbumin)areoftenrestrictedtoparticularcellgroups,andimmunohisto-
Avarietyofotherhistochemicalstains havebeendevelopedtodetectthepresenceofother
chemicalmethods todetecttheseproteins areveryusefulinanatomicalmappingstudies.
transmittersubstances,suchas nitricoxide.
Zincandothermetalstains arebasedonmethods thatdepositsilverorfluorescentdyes
aroundions ofzincandotherheavymetals.TheTimm-Danschersilverstainis commonly
usedtoshow thepresenceofzinc.Zincis usedin
DNAregulationandsynapticplasticity,as wellas othercellularsignaling.Thatis whyzinc
stains canshow
long-termactivitypatterns andresponses tochange.
This is asection ofthecerebellumofamarmosetmonkeyin which thepresenceofthecal-
cium-bindingprotein calbindin has been revealedbyimmunohistochemicalstaining.In
this section,thePurkinjecellbodies arestainedformingalinebetween thedarkbrown
stainedmolecular layer andthelightbrown stainedgranulecelllayer.
91 92

Neurofilaments arestructuralproteins presentincertaintypes ofneurons.Themonoclonalan-
tibodySMI-32is widelyusedbecauseitcandemonstratethepresenceofaparticularneurofil-
amentproteinindifferentstructures of thenervous system.NeuN is anantibodyspecificto
theNeuN nuclearproteinexpressedbynearlyallneurons andneveringlialcells.Afew
neurontypes (suchas thecerebellum's Purkinjecells)donotexpress theNeuN proteinand
arethereforeunlabelled.
Retrogradetracing.This imageshows agroupofneurons showingthepresenceoftheret-
rogradetracer DiI which hadbeen injectedin theregion oftheaxon terminals ofthese
neurons.Themarker was carriedbyretrogradetransportalongtheaxons toreach their
parentcellbodies
Thevalueoftracingdatadepends ontheaccuratelocalizationofthepointwherethetraceris
delivered.Theexactidentificationofthedesireddeliverypointis generallybasedontheuse
ofastereotaxicatlas.Stereotaxicatlases arethree-dimensionalmaps thatcanbeusedtodefine
Atransversesection ofmousespinalcordshowingthepresenceofNeuN antibody.Thecell thelocationofnucleiandtracts withreferencetotheselandmarks,suchas bregma,thatcan
bodies anddendrites ofmotor neurons in theventralhorn areclearlystained.In thedorsal belocatedduringsurgery.Sometracers canbedetectedintargetareas withinless thanaday,
horn,thestain shows thepresenceofmanytinyneurons.Weknowtheseareneurons butothers takeweeks toreachtheir destination.Tracers canbedetectedwithfluorescenceor
rather than gliabecauseglialcells donotcontain theNeuN protein. withhistochemicaltechniques.
Glialproteinmarkers areusedtodistinguishparticularglialcelltypes.GFAP(glialfibrillary Molecular genetics
acidicprotein)identifies astrocytes,andother antibodies areusedtomarkproteins specificto Theabilitytotargetgenes inmicewas developedinthe1980s byNobelPrizewinners Capec-
microgliaandoligodendrocytes. chi,Evans,andSmithies.Genetargetingcanknock-outgenes or insert(knock-in)new genes
intodevelopingcells.Geneknock-ins andknock-outs usetechniques thatcanaddafunction-
inggenetotheorganismor disableageneitalreadyhas sothatits effectontheanimalcanbe
Tracing connections in the nervous system trackedthroughdevelopmentandadulthood.
Untilabout1970,themosteffectivewayof tracingconnections inthenervous systemwas a
silverstainfordegeneratingaxons.Whenaparticular partofthenervous systemis damaged,
thedegeneratingaxons fromthedamagedneurons canbestainedwithasilverstainfirstde-
velopedbyNautaatMITaround1950.This techniquewas themainstayoftracingstudies be-
foreintroducingmoderntracingstudies,suchas thoseusinghorseradishperoxidase(HRP),
thatusenormalaxonaltransportmechanisms.HRPuses retrogradeaxonaltransporttomark
cellbodies afteritis pickedupintoaxonterminals.Still,manynewertracers,suchas cholera
toxinB,useanterogradetransporttoshow theterminaldistributionofparticularaxons.
Asagittalsection ofmousebrain showingtheexpression ofthegenePhox2b.Phox2bis
stronglyexpressedin thefacialnucleus (largeovalareanear theventralmargin).
93 94

MRI imaging
Amajor breakthroughinthe1990ledtotheuseofmagneticresonance(MRI)forimagingthe
brain.MRIrelies ontheabilitytoexcitespecifictypes ofatoms (usuallyhydrogeninwater
molecules)andtoimagethemsystematically.This allows detailedthree-dimensionalmaps to
beobtained.MRIresolution
depends onthestrengthofthemagneticfieldused.EarlyMRIimagingusedfieldstrengths of
1-3Tesla,
whichyieldedaresolutionof 1-3mm,butnew small-volumeMRIscanners use16Tesla
fields,whichcanresolvestructures inthe20-50µmrange.
An imageofaratbrain obtainedwith a9TeslaMRI scanner.
Questions for repetition
- Whatis stainedduringmyelinstaining?
- Whatstaincanbeusedtostainmyelin?
- Whichneurons areparticularlyrichinAChE?
- Whataxonaltransportmechanismdomanytracers use?
95



IBB 2022
Additional Learning Ressource:
Neuroanatomy
Charles Watson
Matthew Kirkcaldie, Friedrich Schwarz
April 2022

AN INTRODUCTION TO THEANATOMY OF THE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM1
Introduction 1
DEVELOPMENT OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 4
The development of the nervous system 4
THE SPINAL CORD 14
Spinal Cord 14
THE BRAIN STEM 22
Brain stem 22
The brain stem cranial nerves 32
The cerebellum 36
DIENCEPHALON 40
The diencephalon 40
HYPOTHALAMUS 42
The hypothalamus 42
Telencephalon 46
The Telencephalon 46
The Broadmann areas of the cortex 51
MOTOR SYSTEMS 53
Motor systems 53
SENSORY SYSTEM 59
The somatosory system 59
The visual system 63
The auditory system 66
The vestibular system 69
Olfaction 73
Taste 77
THEAUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM 79
The autonomic nervous system (ANS) 79

BLOOD SUPPLY TO THE BRAIN 82
The blood supply to the brain 82
THE CIRCULATION OF CEREBROSPINAL FLUID 85
The cerebrospinal fluid and its circulation 85
STAININGAND IMAGING 87
Staining and imaging - Fundamentals 87

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE ANATOMY OF THE CENTRAL
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Introduction
This introductionis avery brief summaryof theparts ofthecentralnervous systemandtheir
functions.Youmayfindithelpfultohavethis basicinformationbeforeyoubeginadetailed
studyoftheparts ofthebrain.
Thecentralnervous systemconsists ofthebrainandthespinalcord.Thespinalcordis rela-
tivelysimpleinstructure,butthebrainis veryelaborate.Themainparts ofthebrainarethe
brainstem,cerebellum,andforebrain.
Thebrainand spinalcordareconnectedtoparts of thebodybynerves.Thesenerves areboth
sensoryandmotor.Thereare12pairs of nerves connectedtothebrain(thecranialnerves)and
32pairs ofnerves connectedtothespinalcord(thespinalnerves).
Thefunctions ofthecentralnervous systemarearrangedhierarchically,withthesimplest
functions (likestandingandwalking) locatedinthespinalcordandthemostsophisticated
functions (likethinkingand memory)locatedintheforebrain.Inbetween,thebrainstemis
responsibleforsurvivalfunctions likebreathing,eating,vocalisation,andbalance.Theadvan-
tageof this hierarchicalarrangementis thatcomplexfunctions arepre-packagedinthebrain
stemandspinalcord;theyactas completefunctionalmodules,readytorespondtocommands
fromtheforebrain.
Thespinalcord
Inoldertimes,thespinalcordwas picturedas asimplesensoryreceivingstationwithsimple
connections tothemuscles andinternalorgans.Thesefacts arestillpartiallytrue,butthey
onlytellpartofthestory.Forexample,thespinalcord actionmodules cancontrolwhole
movementpatterns,notjustconnections tosinglemuscles.Morethanthat,itcancoordinate
muscleactivityinvolvedin walking,standing,balance,andreachingandgrasping.There-
markablecontrolofthespinalcordcanbeseeninanimals likehorses thatareabletostand
andmovearoundwithinminutes ofbeingbornbecausethesefunctions arealreadypre-pro-
grammedinthespinalcord.
Thewiringofthespinalcordenables ittorespondto somesensorysignals inarapidreflex
waybeforethebrainis evenawareof thesensorysignal.Aprimeexampleis whenwestepon
somethingsharpwithbarefeet.Thespinalcordcauses thelowerlimbtoflexandpullaway
fromthesharpobject.Atthesametime,itcauses theextensormuscles intheoppositelower
limbtocontractinorderto stopyoufromoverbalancing.
Thespinalcordis strongly connectedtotheinternalorgans andbloodvessels throughnerves
thatarecalledautonomic.Autonomicnerves controltheworkings ofbloodvessels andthein-
ternalorgans liketheintestines andbladder.Someofthesefunctions,butnotall,canbecon-
trolledbytheforebrainthroughits connections withthespinalcord.Theautonomicnerves
connectedtothethoracicspinalcordarecalledsympatheticnerves,andthoseconnectedto
thesacralspinalcordarecalledparasympatheticnerves.
Thebrainstem
Thebrainstemconnects thespinalcordwiththeforebrain.Itis thehomeofbasicfunctional
systems thatarevitalforsurvival.Theseincludebreathing,chewing,swallowing,vocalisa-
tion,facialexpression,andeyemusclecontrol.As wellas thecontroloftheseactions,the
brainstemreceives sensoryinformationrelatedtotaste,hearing,vision,theskinoftheface,
1

andbalance.Thebrainstemis alsoacorridor throughwhichpathways (tracts)travelfromthe
forebraintothespinalcord,andfromthespinalcordtotheforebrain.Italsocontains centres
thatsendpathways tokeeptheforebrainawakeandalert.
Thebrainstemcanbedividedintotwoparts:thehindbrain(connectedtothespinalcord)and
themidbrain(connectedtotheforebrain).Eachof theseparts gives risetoimportantexpan-
sions onthedorsalsurface.Thedorsalsurfaceofthehindbraingives risetothecerebellum,
andthedorsalsurfaceofthemidbraingives risetotwopairs ofbumps –thesuperiorandinfe-
rior colliculi.Thesuperiorcolliculiarevisualcentres,andtheinferiorcolliculiareauditory
centres.
Thecerebellum
As wehavejustnoted,thecerebellumgrows outofthehindbrain.Itis formedfromthetop
endof thehindbrain,justbehindthemidbrain.Thecerebellumis tinyatbirth,butitlearns to
coordinatecomplexmovements duringthenextfiveyears andbeyond.Thecerebellumcon-
tains anenormous numberoftinyneurons calledgranulecells involvedinlearningcoordina-
tion.Almost80%ofalltheneurons inthebrainarefoundinthecerebellum.
Theforebrain
Theforebrainhas acentralpartthatcontinues thebrainstem,andamassiveoutgrowthon
each sidecalledthecerebralhemisphere.
Thalamus andhypothalamus
Thesmallercentralpartoftheforebrainis madeupof twomainstructures,thethalamus and
thehypothalamus.Thethalamus receives sensorypathways relatedtotouch,taste,hearing,vi-
sion,andbalanceandsends this informationtothecerebralhemisphere.Thehypothalamus is
thecentreforhigh-levelcontrolof thefunctions thatensurethesurvivaloftheindividualand
thespecies.Survivaloftheindividualdepends oneatinganddrinkingandbeingabletode-
fenditself,andsurvivalofthespecies depends onreproductionandcareofoffspring.Thehy-
pothalamus carries outthesefunctions bycontrollingthesurvivalmodules inthebrainstem
andspinalcordandcontrollingtheendocrineandautonomicnervous systems.
Thecerebralhemisphere
Thecerebralhemisphereconsists ofanoutsidelayer calledthecerebralcortexandanumber
ofdeepneurongroups calledthebasalganglia.Inthehumanbrain,thecerebralcortexunder-
goes massiveexpansion,whichresults indeepfolding thatforms sulciandgyrionthesur-
face.Thecerebralcortexis subdividedintoabout180distinctareas,butweonlyknow the
precisefunctions ofsomeoftheseareas.However,wedoknow alotaboutthetotalfunctions
ofthecerebralcortexanditis usefultoremember theseundereightheadings:
- senses
- actions
- thinking
- memory
- communication
- emotions
- sleepandalertness
- relationship
Eachof thesefunctions canbesubdivided.Forexample,'senses' includes touch,taste,hear-
ing,vision,smell,andbalance,and'thinking' includes planning,decisionmakingandprob-
lem-solving.Combinations of theseeightfunctions givehumans higher-levelskills suchas
creativity,inventiveness,socialorganisation,andlearning.
2

Thebasalganglia–striatum,pallidum,andamygdala
Thecerebralhemisphere's deep(non-cortical) parts includeseveralstructures,sometimes col-
lectivelyreferredtoas thebasalganglia.This termis notentirelysatisfactorybutcanbeused
as ashorthand.Thelargerparts ofthebasalgangliaarethestriatumandpallidum,whichare
involvedininheritedandlearnedmotor functions.Whentheseareas aredamagedduringlate
pregnancy,thechildmaydevelopcerebralpalsy–acomplexcombinationofmusclestiffness
andinvoluntarymovements.Asmaller memberof thenon-corticalstructures is theamygdala,
whichplays avitalroleinemotionalresponses (particularlyfear)andsocialgroupbehaviour.
Questions forrepetition
- Whatis thecentralnervous systemconsistingof?
- How manyspinalnervepairs arethere?
- Inwhichpartofthebrainarethemostneurons?
- Whatparts oftheautonomicnervous systemexist?
3

DEVELOPMENT OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
The development of the nervous system
About14,000genes controlthedevelopmentof thebraininmammals,morethanhalfofthe
totalnumberofgenes.Thegenes firstprovidethegeneralinstructions forbuildingconnec-
tions inthebrain,butlater organisetheuniqueconnectionpatterns thatcharacteriseeach
brainregion.
Dorsalandventralspecificationof thecells intheneuraltube
Theembryonicbraindevelops fromastripofectodermalcells thatformtheneuralplate.The
edges oftheneuralplatecurlmediallytojoinandformtheneuraltube,whichencloses the
neuralcanal.
This series ofdiagrams shows theformation oftheneuraltubefromtheembryonicneural
plate.Under theinfluenceofsecretedfators fromthenotochord,thecells oftheneural
platesinkdown toformagrooveandtheedges of thegroove(red)join toformtheneural
tube.Theedges ofthegrooveformthecells oftheneuralcrest,which migrateawayfrom
theneuraltubetoformganglia,melanocytes,andtheskeleton oftheface.Figurefrom
Sanes etal.2004,courtesyofDr.Dan Sanes,NewYorkUniversity.
Atthis earlystage,thecells dorsaltotheneuralcanalaredirectedby Wntand BMPgenes to
formthetwoalarplates (whichhandlesensoryfunctions).Incontrast,thecells ventraltothe
centralcanalaredirectedbysonichedgehog(Shh)genes toformthetwobasalplates (which
areorientedtowardmotorfunctions).
4

As theneuraltubeforms fromtheneuralplate,its developmentis influcendbytheexpres-
sion of agenecalledsonichedgehog(Shh).Expression ofShh in thenotochordinduces
thedevelopmentoftheventralstructures (such as motor neurons)in theneuraltube.The
dorsoventralpatterningoftheneuraltubeis created bytheopposinginfluences odShh
(ventrally) andBMB andWntgenes (dorsally).FigurefromSanes etal.2004,courtesyof
Dr.Dan Sanes,NewYork University.
As theneuraltubecloses,ascatteringofcells breaks awayfromthedorsalsidetoformthe
neuralcrest,whichgives risetotheperipheralnervous system,melanocytes,bones andmus-
cles of theface.
Brainvesicles
As cells divide,therostralendofthetubedevelops threeswellings calledtheforebrain,mid-
brain,andhindbrainvesicles.Thecentralpartof theforebrainvesiclegives risetotwoexten-
sions,thelateralvesicles,subsequentlyformingthecerebralhemispheres.Theroofofthe
midbrainvesicle(thetectum) gives risetofour swellings thatgoontoformthesuperiorand
inferiorcolliculi.Theroofof therostralpartof thehindbrainvesicleforms thecerebellum.
Thesmallgroupofembryoniccells thatforms theneuraltubequicklymultiplyandspecialise
toformspecificfunctionalcentres inthebrain.Themultiplicationrateis extraordinaryand
thefew hundredcells intheprimitivehumanneuraltubeeventuallygenerateover80billion
nervecells.Duringthefirsttwoyears of life,therearetimes whenupto250,000new cells are
generatedeveryminute.
Segmentationinthebrain
Towards theendofthenineteenthcentury,severalembryologicalstudies foundevidenceof
segmentalsubdivisions inthebrain,whichOrr (1987)calledneuromeres.Unfortunately,the
conceptofbrainsegmentationwas largelyignoredfor thenexthundredyears,beforebeing
spectacularlyconfirmedbythenew scienceof geneexpressioninthedevelopingbrain,fol-
lowingthediscoveryofgenetargetinginmicebyMarioCapecchi(1989).Sincethen,many
studies ofgeneexpressioninthedevelopingvertebratebrainhaveconfirmedthatthebrainis
madeupof aseries ofdistinctneuromeres (Puelles etal.,2013;Watsonetal.,2017b):fivein
theforebrain,twointhemidbrain,andtwelveinthehindbrain.Eachsegmentis madeupof
alarandbasalcomponents aroundtheneuralcanal.
5

Attherostralendoftheneuraltube,threeexpansions appear -theforebrain,midbrain and
thehindbrain vesicles.Theforebrain vesicleforms thecerebralhemispheres,thedien-
cephalon,thehypothalamus,endtheeyestalk.Thehindbrain forms theisthmus,the
rhombeencephalon,andthecerebrum.
Theprimarydivisionintheneuraltubeis theseparationoftheforebrainandmidbrainonthe
onehandandfromthehindbrainontheother.This separationis definedbytheexpressionof
Otx2intheforebrainandmidbrainandtheexpressionofGbx2intherostralhindbrain.The
expressionpatternofOtx2 has ledtotheproposalthatthemidbrainsegments bedeclaredpart
oftheforebrain.
Hypothalamicsegments andtheformationofthetelencephalicvesicleandtheopticvesicle
Thefiveforebrainsegments consistoftheterminalhypothalamus (hy2),thepeduncularhypo-
thalamus (hy1),andthreediencephalicsegments calledprosomeres (p1,p2,andp3).Theter-
minalhypothalamicsegment(hy2) is therostralendoftheneuraltube.Itgives risetothete-
lencephalic(cerebral)vesicles dorsallyandtheopticvesicles rostrally,as wellas theposterior
lobeofthepituitary(neurohypophysis).
Thetelencephalicvesicleis layered:thesurfacelayer is thepallium,andbeneathis thesub-
pallium,whichsplits intofour divisions –thestriatum,pallidum,thediagonaldomain,and
thepreopticarea.
Diencephalicsegments
Thethreediencephalicsegments,fromrostraltocaudal,areprosomere1(mainlytheprethala-
mus),prosomere2(mainlythethalamus),andprosomere3(mainlythepretectalarea).The
pinealglandgrows dorsallyfromp2,andtheposteriorcommissureis foundinp3.Although
thediencephalonforms caudallytothehypothalamus,theneuraxis becomes sharplyflexed
duringdevelopment,pushingthehypothalamus intoafinalventralpositionunderthepretha-
lamus.This gavetheimpressionthatthehypothalamus was aventralcomponentofthedien-
cephalon,as itwas wronglyassumedinanolderconceptthereof,includingthethalamus.
Midbrainsegments
Themidbrainconsists ofalargerostralsegment(m1)andamuchsmallercaudalsegment
(m2).Thedorsalsurfaceof m1forms thesuperiorcolliculus andinferiorcolliculus oneach
side.Inthepast,thepretectalsegmentof thediencephalon(includingtheposteriorcommis-
sure)was mistakenlythoughttobelongtothemidbrain.Additionally,thefirstsegmentofthe
hindbrain,theisthmus,was alsomistakenlythoughtto belongtothemidbrain,butgeneex-
6

pressionproves itis not.Thesharpbendof theneuraxis atthelevelofthemidbrain(the
cephalicflexure)results fromtheunder-developmentoftheventralsurfacebutleaves thedor-
salsurfaceintact.This creates aheart-shapedprofileinsagittalsections.
Hindbrainsegments
Thehindbrainis madeupoftheisthmus andelevenrhombomeres (r1tor11).Inoldertext-
books,theisthmus,whichcontains thetrochlearnucleus,was sometimes calledrhombomere
zero(r0).Thedorsalparts oftheisthmus andrhombomere1giverisetothecerebellum.The
pontinenucleiareformedontheventralsurfaceofrhombomeres 3and4.
This is adiagramofan adultrodentbrain showingtheposition ofthesegments ofthe
hindbrain.Theembryonichindbarin contains twelvecompartments fromrostraltocaudal.
Thefirstcompartment,adjacenttothemidbrain is calledtheisthmus.Theremaining
eleven compartments arecalledrhombomeres.Rhombomeres 2to11aredefinedbytheex-
pression ofdifferenthoxgenes.Theisthmus is definedbytheexpression offgf8.Thecere-
bellumis formedbyextensions oftheisthmus andthefirstrhombomere.
Thegenes responsibleforcreatingthemajorityof therhombomeres (r2tor11)arethehome-
obox(hox)genes.Thehoxgenes,discoveredinitiallyindevelopinginsects,arealsouniver-
sallyimportantfornervous systemdevelopmentinvertebrates.Thefirstfour hoxgroups
(hox1-hox4)areexpressedinthehindbrain,and hox5-hox13 areexpressedinthespinalcord,
trunk,limbs,andtail.
Thehoxgenes arenotexpressedintheisthmus andinthefirstrhombomere,whichinsteadex-
press Gbx2,furthersubdividedby Fgf8 expressionintheisthmus.
Theneuralcanalofthehindbrainopens updorsallytoformthefourthventricle,withathick-
enedlateralmargincalledtherhombiclip.
Flexionoftheneuraltube
As mentionedabove,theneuraltubedoes notremainstraightduringdevelopment.Becauseof
differentialdorsalandventralgrowthinsomeareas,thetubeformingthebrainis forcedinto
flexionattwopoints.Themostsignificantof theseis thecephalicflexureinthemidbrainre-
gion.Itis soseverethatitcreates almosta180-degreebendintheneuraxis andpushes thehy-
pothalamus ventraltothediencephalon.Asecond,less severeflexionis foundinthehind-
brain.
7

This is aphotograph ofasagittalsection ofamouseembryo(E13.5)with an overlayshow-
ingthesubdivions ofthedevelopningnervous system.Theimageis taken fromtherefer-
enceatrlas developedbyLuis Puelles as partof theAllen DevelopingMouseBrainAtlas
createdbytheAllen Institutefor Brain Science.
Lackof appreciationofthesignificanceof thecephalicflexurehas ledtotragicmisinterpreta-
tionof therelationships betweenparts oftheforebrain,particularlythebeliefthatthehypo-
thalamus is simplysomekindof ventraladditiontothethalamus.
Regionalisationinthespinalcord
Thespinalcordis traditionallydividedintoanumber ofsegments relatedtotheemergenceof
individualspinalnerves.Thepresenceof avertebrabetweeneachpairofspinalnerves gives
theimpressionthatthespinalcordis asegmentedstructure,butthis is anillusion,andthe
roots of thespinalnerves runinacontinuous stripalongthecordinsidethevertebralcanal.
Ontheotherhand,thereis clear evidencefromanatomicaland hoxgeneexpressionstudies
thatthespinalcordoffour-limbedvertebrates canbedividedintosixdistinctfunctionalre-
gions -prebrachial(C1-C4),brachial(C5-T1),postbrachial((T2-L1),crural(L2-S1),postcru-
ral(S2-S4),andcaudal(S5-Co2).Thebrachialandcruralregions containthemotorneurons
8

thatsupplythelimbmuscles oftheupperandlower limbs,respectively.Thepostbrachialand
postcruralparts containthepreganglionicneurons of thesympatheticandspinalparasympa-
theticsystems,respectively.Theprebrachialregioncontains themotorneurons supplyingthe
cervicalmuscles,andthecaudalregioncontains motorneurons supplyingthetailmuscles.
Neuralcrest
Justaftertheclosureoftheneuraltube,agroupof cells migrates awayfromthedorsalsurface
oftheneuraltubetoformacolumnoneither side,calledtheneuralcrest.Theneuralcrest
cells giverisetobothneurons (theganglioncells of theautonomicnervous systemandthe
sensorydorsalrootganglioncells of cranialandspinalnerves)andnon-neuralelements such
as themelanocytes oftheskinand(surprisingly)thebones andmuscles oftheface.The
melanocytes migratelongdistances toreachallareas oftheskinsurface.
Developmentoftheperipheralnervous system
Theperipheralnervous systemis madeupofthreecomponents –theaxons ofmotorneurons
thatconnecttomuscles,thedorsalrootganglioncells andtheirlongaxons,whichreachsen-
soryreceptors,andthegangliaandpostganglionicaxons ofthesympatheticandparasympa-
theticganglioncells.Itis importanttonotethattheopticandolfactorynerves arenotpartof
theperipheralnervous systemsincetheyaredirectoutgrowths oftheforebrain,withmyelin
producedbyoligodendrocytes insteadofSchwanncells.
Theelements oftheperipheralnervous systemareprimarilydistributedbycranialnerves 3-12
andbythespinalnerves.Inbothcranialandspinalnerves,theaxons ofmotorneurons grow
outuntiltheyreachtheirtargetmuscle.
Adultneurogenesis
Someparts ofthematuremammalianbrain,notablythehippocampus,thecerebellum,andthe
olfactorybulb,canactuallygeneratenew neurons.Inmostotherareas ofthebrain,itseems
neuroplasticityappears tobesolelytheresultof themassivereorganisationofsynapticnet-
works inresponsetonew demands.
Migrationofneurons
Inmanyparts ofthebrain, neurons continuetodevelopintheplacewheretheywerefirst
formed.Theseneurons maysendtheir axons toother areas inthebrain,buttheneuronalcell
bodies donotmove.However,inafew places inthebrain,groups ofneurons migratefrom
theirplaceofbirthtoreachtheirfinallocation.Inthecerebralcortex,mostneurons aregener-
atedatthesurfaceoftheventricleandmigrateoutwardtofindthecorticallayerinwhichthey
willfinallyreside.Mostoftheneurons thatmigratetowardthesurfaceofthebrain(radialmi-
gration) arethefuturepyramidalandstellateneurons ofthecortex,bothofwhichareexcita-
toryglutamatergicneurons.Ontheotherhand,thesmallGABAergicinhibitoryneurons of
thecortexariseinthebaseof theforebrainandmigratetangentiallytoreachtheirfinalsettle-
mentinthecortex,sothefinalstructureis theproductoflargemigrations movingatrightan-
gles toeachother.TheGABAneurons constitute20% ofthecorticalneurons inmammals.
Thelargestmigrationofneurons inthebrainbegins intherostralpartoftherhombiclip,
whichborders therostralendof thefourthventricleofthehindbrain.Mostoftherhombiclip
cells migratedorsallyintothedevelopingcerebellum,whilesmallernumbers migrateven-
trallyintothelongitudinalpartofthehindbrain.Thosethatmigrateintothecerebellumform
thetinygranulecells thateventuallymakeup70% ofalltheneurons inthebrain.Becauseof
this,therhombiclipis now recognisedas themostactivecellgenerationareainthedevelop-
ingnervous system.
Thewidedispersalofneurons andmelanocytes fromtheneuralcrestconstitutes anotherma-
jorneuralmigrationduring development.Theprocess bywhichthecrestcells detachand
movethroughtissueinvolves manygenes,someof whichareimplicatedincancermetastasis.
9

Formationofsynapses
Developingneurons sproutthinoutgrowths calledprocesses,whichconnectwithothernerve
cells ormusclecells.Theconnections theymake,generallybetweenanaxonprocess onthe
sendingsideandadendriteprocess onthereceivingside,arecalledsynapses.Muchoftheba-
sicwiringofthebrainstemandspinalcordis laiddownearlyinfetaldevelopment.These
earlyconnections arethoserequiredforsurvivalas theycontrolbreathingandswallowing.
Thereis noroomforerrorhere,andthesevitalconnections areformedaccordingtoastrict
program.Thefirstmovements ofthefetus earlyinpregnancyinhumans areclearevidenceof
theformationofearlyconnections betweenneurons andmusclecells.Inmice,theconnec-
tions withmuscles aremadeafter only12days ofembryonicdevelopment,buttheseconnec-
tions arenotmadeuntilabout12weeks inhumans.
Thesecondcategoryofconnections starts lateinfetaldevelopmentandextends intochild-
hoodandadultlife.Theselaterconnections areless rigidlyprogrammed,andtheyaremade
whilethenewbornmammalinteracts withits environmentandis learningnew skills.Thepe-
riodinwhich this typeofplasticityis mostactiveis termedthe"sensitiveperiod" forsensory
andmotorsystems andincludes ashorter "criticalperiod" duringwhichthefundamentalor-
ganisationis determined.Itwas formerlybelievedthattheformationofnew connections
stoppedsometimesoonafterbirth,butitis now knownthatnew connections areanormal
partofthegrowthofallbrains throughoutlife.Theabilityofthebraintoconstantlyformnew
connections andtoreshapepatterns ofconnectioninresponsetonew informationis referred
toas plasticity.Theplasticityof thehumanbrainis remarkable.Ithas beenestimatedthatthe
brainforms anaverageofamillionnew connections perminutethroughoutthewholeoflife.
Axonguidance
Anaxonthatgrows outfromaneuronwillonlybefunctionallysuccessfulifitconnects with
thecorrecttargetcell.Themechanismthathelps itfindits correcttargetis calledaxonguid-
ance,oraxonpathfinding.Manygrowingaxons havebeenfoundtobeextraordinarilyaccu-
rateinfindingtherightpathtotheirtarget.Insomecases,theaxons neurons findtheirproper
partnerbecausetheysticktomatchingmolecules onthesurfaceofotheraxons orhaverecep-
tors sensitivetomolecules madebytheir targets,whicharebothcontrolledbyacommon
gene.For example,motorneuronclusters inthespinalcordandthemusclegrouptowhich
theyconnecthavebeenshowntoshareaspecificgenemarker.Axonguidanceworks bya
process of stepwiserefinement:First,thegrowingaxonfollows ageneralpathway,bundling
withsimilaraxons andobeyinggeneralroutingcues (towhichitmayormaynotbesensitive)
suchas crossingthemidline.Thenuponnearingits destination,itdetects morespecificchem-
icalsignals fromits target.Agenepairingsystemlikethis,encodingattractantmolecules and
thereceptors whichrespondtothem,alsoexists inthehindbrainneurongroups thatconnect
toparticularcells inthecerebellum.
Whateverthemechanisms, theformationofearlyconnections is remarkablyaccurateandreli-
able,sothatbrains arealways initiallywiredupinthesameway.Thegrowingaxon's tipis a
veryactiveenlargedareacalledagrowthcone.Thegrowthconeis ahighlymobilestructure
thatappears tofeelits waythroughtissue,detectingveryfaintchemicalsignals thatleaditto-
wards its targets orwhichsteer itawayfromunwantedconnections.Thesigns maybefixedin
place,likesignposts,ormaybedistributedover longdistances,likethebreadcrumbs leftbe-
hindbyHanselandGretel.
10

Agrowth coneatthetipofan axon fromaratdorsalrootganglion neuron in cellculture.
Stainingfor actin (green)outlines theflattenedlamellipodium,with numerous finefilopo-
diaextendingtoexploretheenvironmet.Microtubules (red)filltheaxon andextendinto
thecentrallamellipodium,thesiteof activegrowth.In vivo,thegrowth conewouldhavea
three-dimensionalruffledshape.Imagecourtesyof MichaelThompson andDr.LisaFoa,
UniversityofTasmania,Australia.
Atthestagewhenneurons arematuringandsendingoutaxons tomakecontactwithother
neurons,thedevelopingnervous systemsecretes atapestryofguidancemolecules thatattract
andrepel,definingpathways,markingcrossingpoints,andidentifyingdestinations.Growing
axons explorethis spacewiththeirgrowthcones,respondingtosomecues andignoringoth-
ers,accordingtothereceptors theycarry.Axons fromdiverseregions convergeonshared
pathways andthenbranchouttodistincttargets as theyencounterindividualcues.Several
guidancemolecules havebeenidentified,andtheir functions havebeenanalysedindetail;
theyincludenetrins,semaphorins,andSlitproteins.Oncetheyreachtheirtargets,axons stop
growingbecausetheyencounter cellsurfacemolecules thatturnoffgrowthandstimulate
synapticformation.
Thesestopsignals varyinconcentration,soarrivingaxons mayfanoutacross thetargettissue
inanorganisedgradient.Inthecaseofephrins andEphreceptors,someaxons willhavefew
Ephreceptors,andsomewillhavemany.If theyencounteratissuewithagradientofephrins
expressed,axons withmanyreceptors willstoprespondingtosmallconcentrations ofephrins.
Incontrast,thosewithfew receptors willpushpastlow-ephrinareas andstopwhenthe
ephrins becomemoreconcentrated.SincetheEphreceptors andephrins areregulatedbyge-
neticgradients inthetargetandtheoriginoftheaxons respectively,this simplemechanism
preserves topographicarrangements across longdistances.
Synapsepruningandnervecelldeath
Notallofthesenew connections workas wellas theyshould,andmillions ofsynapses are
prunedduringearlybraindevelopmentsothatthematuresystems formedareaccurateandef-
ficient.Ingeneral,mostsystems follow apatternof beingover-connectedinitially,whichis
thenrefinedbypruning,whichcontinues throughoutlife.Thesamepruningprocess is applied
toneurons:manyarekilled off duringdevelopment,specificallythosethathavemadepoor
connections orareotherwiseunnecessary.Thesewaves ofsynapticpruningandneuronal
deatharepartoftheprocess ofbuildinganefficientnervous system.As withsynapses,the
pruningof cells andaxonbranches continues throughoutlife.
Criticalperiods infetaldevelopment
Certaindevelopmentalinsults cancausedevastatingdamagetothedevelopingbrainand
spinalcord.Theseincludevitamindeficiency(neuraltubedefect),alcohol(fetalalcoholsyn-
drome),iodinedeficiency,andinfections (rubella).Eachoneofthesecancausewidespread
11

damagetothefetalbrain.Itis possiblethatviralinfections mayalsocausecerebralpalsydur-
ingpregnancy.
Neuraltubedefects (NTD),themostcommonofwhichis calledspinabifida,arecausedbya
disruptionoftheveryearlydevelopmentoftheneuraltube,withincompleteclosureatthe
rostraland/orcaudalends.Themostcommonplaceforincompleteclosureis inthecaudal
partofthespinalcord,andinthemostseverecases,thedamagetothespinalcordresults in
paralysis ofthelowerlimbandloss ofcontrolofthebladderandbowel.Somefamilies havea
geneticpredispositiontoNTD,butthemostcriticalfactoris alackofthevitaminfolate.
Sincetheriskperiodoccurs beforeapparentsigns of pregnancy,allwomenwhomightbe-
comepregnantshouldmakesurethattheirfolateintakeis high–eitherbyeatingleafyvegeta-
bles andotherfolate-richfoods or bytakingfolatevitamintablets as wellasupplement.In
manycountries,breadflourandbreakfastcereals areenrichedwithfolatetoensurethatthe
wholepopulationhas adequatefolatelevels.
Alcoholconsumptionbywomeninthefirsteightweeks ofpregnancycanhavedevastating
effects onearlybraindevelopment,andthechildmay bebornwithsignificantdeficiencies in
brainfunction.Theconditionis calledfetalalcoholsyndrome.
Withinthefirstthreemonths ofpregnancy,rubellainfection(Germanmeasles)cancausema-
jorbrainabnormalities,includingdeafness andblindness.
IntheWest,itis notwidelyappreciatedthatiodinedeficiencyduringfetaldevelopmentis the
mostimportantcauseofintellectualdisabilityworldwide.Butitis stillaffectingmillions of
childreninmountainous areas ofAsia,SoutheastAsia,andsouth-easternAustralia,whereio-
dinehas beenleechedoutof thesoil.Iodinedeficiencyresults inhypothyroidismthatperma-
nentlydamages thedevelopingbrainbyaffectingkey genes forconnectivity.Theproblemof
iodinedeficiencyis easilyremediedwiththesupplyofiodinesupplements insaltandoil,but
this is notalways easytoachievebecauseof logisticimpediments.
Criticalperiods duringpostnataldevelopment
Morethansixtyyears ago, itwas shownthatkittens thathadoneeyekeptclosedduringapar-
ticularperiodafterbirthwereunabletodevelopbinocularvisionsubsequently.This ledtoa
theorythatonemustreceiveaspecificsensoryinputwithinalimitedperiodforapartofthe
braintodevelopnormally.This concepthadamajorimpactontheories ofpostnataldevelop-
ment.Inparticular,itraisedserious concerns thatchildrendeprivedofaparticularstimulus or
environmentforashortperiodintheirlifemightbedeprivedforeverofsomevitalcapability.
However,this view has notbeensupportedbycontemporaryevidence,anditis now feltthat
theconceptshouldbeappliedmoreloosely.Themodernversionofthis conceptargues that
criticalperiods aretheidealtimeformostchildrento receiveaparticularinput.However,it
accepts thatdelayedinputs canstillbeeffective.For this reason,theterm'sensitiveperiods' is
commonlyusedtodenotelonger timeintervals duringwhichexperiencecanshapethener-
vous system.Sensitiveperiods duringhumanpostnataldevelopmentthathavereceivedpartic-
ularattentionarethoseforlanguageacquisition(mainlyninemonths tofiveyears),develop-
mentofemotionalcontrol(frombirthtotwoyears),motorcontrol(frombirthtoeightyears),
andhabitualways ofresponding,suchas enthusiasmandpersistence(fromsixmonths totwo
years).
Later processes thatrefinethestructureof thebrain
Thedevelopmentofthebraindoes notstopinchildhood.As notedabove,theformationof
new synapses continues throughoutlife.Inthecerebralcortex,this is accompaniedbythe
continuedgrowthofdendrites.Frombirthtoadulthood,themass ofthecortexincreases five-
foldwithoutanynew cells forming–anincreasealmostentirelyduetodendritegrowth.It
has beenshownthatthereis amarkedincreaseinnew synapsegrowthinthefrontallobes
duringadolescencesothatthefrontallobes arenotfullymatureuntilabout25years ofage.
Another vitalprocess thatoccurs duringchildhoodandadolescenceis thatofprogressive
myelination.Myelinsheaths arelaiddownduringthepostnatalyears untilearlyadulthood.
Myelinationincreases thespeedoftransmissionofactionpotentials alongaxons.This might
12

provideamechanismforstabilisingconnectiontimes whilethebodyenlarges.Thedistance
fromthespinalcordtothefootmuscles increases fromabout300mminababytoabout1000
mminanadult;ifmyelinationdidnotoccur,itcould takethirtytimes as longforacommand
toreachthemuscles inanadult.
Thedevelopmentofthecerebellumis delayedcomparedwithotherparts ofthebrain.Atthe
timeof birth,thecerebellumis extremelysmall,butduringthefirstsixyears oflifeinhu-
mans,itgrows tothesizeofanorange.Thecerebellum's roleis toassistwiththecoordination
ofmovement,soits developmentis delayedsothatitmatches theperiodwhenthechildis
learningnew motorskills.
Neuralplasticity
Neuralplasticityrefers totheabilityofthematurebraintochangeitselfbygeneratingnew
neurons orbymakingnew connections.Therealisationthatthebraincancontinuallychange
itself is quitenew;ithas ledtosignificantchanges inneurosciencethinking.Inthepast,itwas
thoughtthatthestructureof thematuremammalianbraincouldnotbechangedsothatsome-
onewhosufferedastroke, orsomeotherformofbraininjurywouldbecondemnedtoaper-
manentloss offunction.However,since1990ithas becomeevidentthatthebraincancom-
pensatebycreatingmajorchanges inconnections afterinjury,andmanyrehabilitationpro-
grams havebeendevelopedtotakeadvantageof this capacity.
Theabilityto grow andmakenew connections is notrestrictedtoinjuredbrains -italsooc-
curs innormalbrains asked tocopewithlargeamounts ofnew information.Forexample,an
MRI studyofthebrains of final-year medicalstudents foundthatthegreymatterintheirpari-
etalcortexandhippocampus increasedsubstantiallyin theperiodleadinguptotheirfinalex-
ams.
Apioneerintheareaofneuroplasticity,MikeMerzenich,has promotedtheideathatexercis-
ingthebraincanincreaseits capacityas adefenceagainstcognitivedeteriorationinelderly
individuals.
Questions forrepetition
- How manygenes areinvolvedinthedevelopmentofthemammalianbrain?
- How long does thematurationof thefrontalcortextake?
- Inwhichbrainareas does adultneurogenesis takeplacetoanynotableextent?
- Whatarethecomponents oftheperipheralnervous system?
- Whatarethenamesofthesignallingmoleculesthatorientventrallyordorsallyoftheneural
tube?
- WherearethefirstfourHoxgenes expressed?
- Whatis oneofthemainreasons for neuraltubedefects?
13

THE SPINAL CORD
Spinal Cord
Thecentralnervous systemconsists oftheforebrain,brainstem,andspinalcord.Thefore-
brainis comprisedofthecerebralhemispheres,olfactorystructures,hypothalamus,anddien-
cephalon.Thebrainstemconsists of themidbrain(mesencephalon)andthehindbrain
(rhombencephalon),comprising12segments.
Thespinalcordis thesimplestpartof thecentralnervous systemcontaining:
- sensoryneurons thatreceivesensationfromthesensoryreceptors
- motorneurons thatcontrolmuscles
- longtracts connectingthespinalcordwiththebrain
- thepreganglionicnucleioftheautonomicnervous system
- patterngenerators forcomplexmovements suchas runningatdifferentspeeds
Thespinalcordis alongcylindricalstructureextendingfromthebaseoftheskulltothefirst
lumbarvertebrainthehuman.Thespinalcordis noticeablythickerintheregions thatare
connectedtotheupperandlowerlimb.
In this photograph ofmousespinalcord,thethickenedregions representtheareas ofat-
tachmentoftheupper and lower limbnerves.
Inatransversesectionofthespinalcord,acentralbutterfly-shapedareaofgreymatteris sur-
roundedbywhitematter.Thegreymatter is dividedintoventralanddorsalhorns,andthe
whitemattercanbedividedintothreefuniculi(columns)–dorsal,lateralandventral.
Thegreymattercanbefurthersubdividedintoaseries oflayers calledthelaminaeofRexed.
Layers 1to4formthedorsalhornandarerelatedtosensoryinput.Layers 7to9formthe
ventralhornandhavefunctions generallytothemotorsystem,whilethelimbandtrunkmotor
neurons arelocatedinlamina9.Inbetweenthedorsalandventralhorns lies thelamina5,
whichis thesiteofpatterngenerators for limbmovements.Lamina6is smallandis not
presentatalllevels.
14

Schematictransversesection through thespinalcord.
Schematictransversesection through thespinalcordshowingimportantlaminae.
Thespinalcordreceives sensoryinformationfromtheskin,joints,andinternalorgans;this
informationis processedlocallyandsenttothebrain.Themotorneurons inthespinalcord
connectwiththemuscles,bloodvessels,andinternalorgans andcaninitiateactivityinthese
structures.Thebrainsends nervefibrebundles (tracts)tocontrolthesemotorneurons.
Themammalianspinalcordis madeupof sixdistinctanatomicalandfunctionalregions–one
fortheneck(prebrachial),onefortheforelimb(brachial),oneforthesympatheticoutflow
(postbrachial),oneforthelowerlimb(crural),onefor thepelvicparasympatheticoutflow
(postcrural),andalastonefor thetail(caudal).
Inthehuman,theprebrachialregionextends fromspinalcordsegments C1toC4,thebrachial
regionfromC5toT1,thepostbrachialregionfromT2 toL2,thecruralregionfromL3toS1,
thepostcruralregionfromS2toS4,andthecaudalregionfromS5tothecoccygealsegments.
Thespinalcordcontains sophisticatedpatterngenerators thatcaninitiatedifferentkinds of
coordinatedmovements.Movementpatterns generatedinthespinalcordincludelocomotion,
posture,andbalancing.
15

Motorneurons inthespinalcord
Motorneurons initiatemusclefibrecontractionandsecretionofglands,actingas thefinal
commonpathwayformotorfunction's centralandperipheralneuralpathways.Themotorneu-
rons inthespinalcordbelongtotwomajor functionalgroups –somaticandautonomic.So-
maticmotorneurons innervateskeletal(voluntary) musclewhileautonomicmotorneurons in-
nervatesmoothmuscleandglands.
Somaticmotorneurons arelocatedintheventralhornofthegreyofthespinalcordinlamina
9.Thesearelargemultipolar neurons thatstainwellwithacetylcholinesteraseandNeuN
markers.
Atransversesection ofmammalian spinalcordstainedfor NeuN showingupper limbmo-
tor neurons (MN)in lamina9oftheventralhorn.
Thelamina9motorneurons arelargebecausetheyeachsupportaverylongaxonthatruns to
supplythestriatedmuscles of theaxialskeleton(muscles oftheneck,trunk,andtail)andthe
muscles oftheupperandlower limbs.Themotor neurons innervatingaxialmuscles are
presentatallspinalcordlevels.Still,thelargemotor neurons innervatinglimbmuscles are
onlypresentattheleveloforiginoftheupperlimbnerves (C5toT1spinalcordsegments in
thehuman)andtheleveloforiginof thelower limbnerves (L3toS1spinalcordsegments in
thehuman).
Theautonomicmotorneurons ofthespinalcordcanbedividedintotwoseparategroups–the
preganglionicmotorneurons of thesympatheticnervous systemandthepreganglionicmotor
neurons ofthepelvicparasympatheticsystem.
16

In humans,thesympatheticpreganglionicmotor neurons arefoundattheT2toL2spinal
cord,andtheparasympatheticpreganglionicmotor neurons arelocatedfromS2toS4
spinalcordsegments.
Spinalcordnerveroots
Adorsalandventralrootconnects eachspinalnervetothespinalcord.Theventralrootcon-
tains theaxons ofmotorneurons,andthedorsalrootcontains sensoryaxons.Thecellbodies
ofthesensory axons arelocatedinthedorsalrootganglion,whichforms aswellingattached
tothedorsalroot.
Overviewspinalnerveroots.
Thespinalnerves
Thespinalnerves arenamedfor thevertebraadjacenttotheirexit,butthenamingconvention
changes fromcervicaltothoracicandlower levels.Inthecervicalregion,thenerves are
namedfor thevertebralbodybelow theirexitsothatC1exits abovetheC1vertebra,C2
abovetheC2vertebra,andsoon.However,inthethoracicandlowervertebrallevels,the
emergingnerves arenamedforthevertebralbodyabovetheirlevelofexitsothatT1exits be-
low theT1vertebra,T2below theT2vertebra,andsoon.This creates aproblemforthenerve
identityemergingbetween theC7vertebraandtheT1vertebrasinceitdoes notfiteitherof
thesedefinitions.Thesolutionwas tonamethis nervetheC8nerve,eventhoughthereis no
C8vertebra.Theresultis thatthehumanhas 7cervicalvertebraeand8cervicalspinalnerves.
17

Schematicoverviewofthespinalnerves.
Below thecervicalregion, thereare12thoracicvertebraeand12thoracicspinalnerves,5
lumbarvertebraeand5lumbarspinalnerves,5sacralvertebraeand5sacralspinalnerves.
Thenumberoftail(coccygeal) vertebraevaries fromonetotwo.
Theforelimb muscles aresuppliedbynerves fromthebrachialplexus,formedbytheC5,C6,
C7,C8,andT1spinalnerves.Thehindlimbmuscles aresuppliedbythelumbosacralplexus,
formedbytheL2,L3,L4, L5,andS1spinalnerves.
Dermatomes
Eachspinalnervesupplies aspecificstripof skinfromthemiddleofthebacktotheventral
midline.Theskinareaprovidedbyasinglespinalnerveis calledadermatome.This diagram
shows thedistributionofthespinaldermatomes fromC5toS1.
Thedermatomes ofthehuman body.
18

Spinalcordtracts
Descendingtracts inthespinalcord
Descendingtracts ariseinthecerebralcortexandthebrainstem.Mostdescendingtracts cross
inthebrainstemandthendescendineitherthelateralorventralfuniculus ofthespinalcord.
Thedescendingtracts terminateoninterneurons inlaminae5,6,and7,motorneurons inlam-
ina9,orboth.Infunctionalterms,ausefuldistinctioncanbemadebetweenthedescending
tracts inthelateralfuniculus andthoseintheventralfuniculus:thelateralfuniculus tracts
(corticospinal,rubrospinal,lateralreticulospinal) aremoreconcernedwiththecontrolof
flexormovements andparticularlymovements ofthedistalparts ofthelimbs,whereas thede-
scendingtracts oftheventralfuniculus (vestibulospinal,tectospinal,medialreticulospinal)are
moreconcernedwiththecontrolof extensor(postural)muscles ofthetrunkandproximal
parts ofthelimbs.Thecorticospinaltracttravels fromthemotorcortexthroughtheinternal
capsule,pons,andpyramid toreachthepyramidaldecussation,crossingtotheoppositeside.
Schematicoverviewofthecoricospinaltract.
Theinternalcapsulestripofwhitematter inthecerebralhemisphereis acommonsiteofdam-
agetothecorticospinaltractinhumans,whereahaemorrhageorbloodclotcancausea
stroke.Aninternalcapsulestrokeresults inparalysis andstiffness inthemuscles oftheoppo-
sitesideof thebody.
Inprimates,somecorticospinalfibres makedirectcontactwithmotorneurons inlamina9.
Still,directconnections fromthecerebralcortextomotorneurons arerareorabsentinnon–
primatemammals.Thecorticalcontrolof limbmovements innon–primatemammals is
mainlybasedonamajorprojectiontolamina5inthespinalcord,whichcontains ahighlyor-
ganizedsystemoflimbmovementpatterngenerators (Levineetal.,2014).
Somebrainstemcentres sendtracts tothespinalcord.Thesearetherednucleus (rubrospinal
tract),superiorcolliculus (tectospinaltract),vestibularnuclei(vestibulospinaltracts),and
reticular nuclei(reticulospinaltracts).
Ascendingtracts inthespinalcord
Boththespinothalamictracts andthedorsalcolumns (gracileandcuneatefasciculi)convey
somatosensoryinformationfromonesideof thebodytothecerebralcortexoftheopposite
sideviathethalamus.Eachofthesesystems is basicallyachainofthreeneurons:thefirst
19

neuronis adorsalrootganglioncellwithits centralprocess enteringthespinalcordtoascend
forsomedistancebeforeitsynapses withthesecondneuroneinthechain;theaxonofthesec-
ondneuroncrosses themidlineimmediatelyandclimbs tothethalamus;thethirdneuron
sends its axonfromthethalamus tothecerebralcortex.
Schematicoverviewofsensorypathways.
Itis importanttonotethatthecentralprocess ofthefirstneuroninthespinothalamicsystem
is short(its axonascends foronlyafew spinalcordsegments).However,themainprocess of
thefirstneuronofthedorsalcolumnsystemascends allthewaytothemedullaoblongata.
Thefirstneuronofthespinothalamicsystemascends inthedorsolateralfasciculus (justexter-
naltolamina1),andthecellbodyofthesecondneuronmaylieinlamina1,2,3,or4.
Theaxonofthesecondspinothalamicneuroncrosses themidlineintheanteriorwhitecom-
missureof thespinalcord. Itthenascends ineither thelateralspinothalamicpathway(pain
andtemperaturesensation) ortheanteriorspinothalamictract(touchsensation).
Thedorsalcolumntracts carrytouch,deeppressure,proprioceptive,andvibrationsenseinfor-
mationinthegracileandcuneatefasciculi-thegracilefasciculus mainlyconveys information
fromthehindlimb,andthecuneatefasciculus conveys informationfromtheforelimb.Note
thatthesetwopathways donotcross themidlineuntiltheyreachthebrainstem.
Thespinocerebellar tracts
Thedorsalspinocerebellarandventralspinocerebellartracts conveypositionsense(proprio-
ception)andtactileinformationtothecerebellum.Thesetracts endonthesamesideas they
began.As withtheotherascendingfibresystems,thefirstneuronofthedorsalspinocerebellar
andventralspinocerebellarsystems is adorsalrootganglioncell.Inthecaseofthedorsal
spinocerebellarsystem,thefirstneuronends bysynapsingonneurons ofthedorsalnucleus
(thenucleus ofClarke),whichis aprominentcellgroupfoundinthoracicandupperlumbar
levels (notethatthesearethesamelevels atwhichthepreganglioniccolumnofthesympa-
theticnervous systemis located).Thedorsalnucleus lies justdorsolateraltothecentralcanal.
Theaxons ofthesecells formthedorsalspinocerebellartractinthelateralfuniculus andend
inthecerebellarcortexofthesameside.Theventralspinocerebellarsystemis morecompli-
20

catedanatomically,but,in general,itis similartothedorsalspinocerebellarsystemsinceit
ends inthecerebellumofthesameside.Boththedorsalspinocerebellarandventralspinocere-
bellarsystems serveonlythebody's rearhalf;thebody's fronthalfis servedbyanadditional
spinocerebellarsystemcalledtheexternalcuneatesystem.
Schematicoverviewofthespinocerebellar tracts.
Questions forrepetition
-Whichlaminaeofthespinalcordaremainlyassociatedwithmotorfunctions?
-Whichbrainareais frequentlyaffectedbystrokes?Whataretheconsequences?
-Whichneurons constitutethespinalcord?
-Whatsensoryinformationis transmittedinthedorsalcolumns ofthespinalcord?
-Fromwhichspinalcordsegments dothepreganglionicsympatheticnerves originate?
21

THE BRAIN STEM
Brain stem
Thebrainstemis madeup oftwoparts,themidbrain(mesencephalon)andthehindbrain
(rhombencephalon).Themidbrainis continuous withtheforebrain,andthehindbrainis con-
tinuous withthespinalcord.
Inoldertextbooks,thebrainstemis dividedintothreeparts:midbrain,pons,andmedullaob-
longata.Unfortunately,this schema,basedonanow outdatedview ofhumanbrainanatomy,
is misleadingandinaccurate.Theconfusionrelates tothemushroom–likeexpansionofthe
pons inthehumanbrainsothatitappears tobeginadjacenttothemidbrainandextendtohalf
thelengthofthehindbrain.Thetruenatureof themammalianpons is explainedintheChap-
teronbrainsegmentation.Inthemeantime,westronglyrecommendthatyouusetheterms
'midbrain' and'hindbrain' tosubdividethebrainstem.
Thebrainstemserves anumber ofkeyfunctions:
-thecontrolofthemuscles oftheeye,face,mouth,andthroat;controlofthesalivary
andlacrimalglands;
-controloftheinternalorgans ofthethoraxandabdomen;
-receivingsensationfromtheface,mouth,andthroat,includingtaste;
-receivingsensationfromthespecialsenseorgans forvision,hearingandbalance;
-coordinationofmovementofthelimbs andtrunk
-centers forcontrolofbreathing,micturition,anddefecation;
-centers formaintenanceofalertness;
-actingas acorridorforlongmotor andsensorypathways thatconnectthebrainwith
thespinalcord;
-andas aplaceoforiginof descendingmotorpathways.
Thebrainstemis connectedwiththemuscles andsensoryorgans oftheheadthroughten
pairs ofcranialnerves (cranialnerves 3to12).Thereis aseparatechapterdetailingthe
anatomyand connections ofthebrainstemcranialnerves.
Thebrainstemhas abasiccylindricalstructure,buttherearemajoroutgrowths fromthedor-
salsurface.Inthemidbrain,thesedorsaloutgrowths arecalledthesuperiorandinferiorcolli-
culi–twopairs ofroundedbumps thatarereceivingcenters forvisualpathways (thesuperior
colliculi)andauditorypathways (theinferior colliculi).Thelargeoutgrowthfromthehind-
brainis thecerebellum.Duringearlydevelopment,thecerebellumgrows outoftherostral
partofthehindbrain,justcaudaltothemidbrain.
22

Asagittalsection through thebrain of amarmosetmonkeyshowingthemidbrain andhind-
brain.Thecerebellumis alargeoutgrowth connectedtothedorsalsurfaceofthehind-
brain.Thetworoundedstructures on thedorsalsurfaceofthemidbrain arethesuperior
andinferior colliculi.
BRAIN STEM SECTIONS STAINED FORMYELIN
Thenextsectioninvolves theexaminationof images ofhumanbrainstemandtheidentifica-
tionof majorstructures inthesesections.Wewillfirstlookatthemainfeatures ofbrainstem
sections insummaryandthenlookatdetails withineachsection.Thesections shownhereare
stainedtoshow myelinated fibers inordertopresentaclearpictureofthemainpathways in
thebrainstem.Groups ofneurons (nuclei)donotstainandappearas paleareas inthesesec-
tions.
23

SECTIONSTHROUGHTHECAUDALHINDBRAIN
Thecaudalendofthehumanbrainstemis basicallysimilartosections ofthecervicalspinal
cord.However,aseries ofimportanttractrelocations changes theappearanceas weascend
throughthehindbrain.Themainchanges arethefollowing:
-Therelocationofthecorticospinaltractfromits lateralpositioninthespinalcord
toaventralpositioninthepyramidof theoppositeside.Thecorticospinaltractis a
descendingtract,butherewearefollowingitinreverse.
Caudalhuman hindbrain atthelevelof thepyramidaldecussation.
-Theterminationofthegracileandcuneatefasciculiinthegracileandcuneate
nuclei–aftersynapsing,this pathwaycontinues bycrossingthemidline(internal
arcuatefibers)toreachapositiondorsaltothepyramid-thenewlyformedcrossed
tractis calledthemediallemniscus.Themediallemniscus travels rostrallytoreach
thethalamus.
Hindbrain atthelevelofthegracileandcuneatenucleiandthesomatosensorydecussation.
24

-Afterall,thegracileandcuneatefibers havesynapsed,andthesecondaxonhas
crossedthemidlinetoreachthemediallemniscus,thedorsalregionofthebrain
stemis progressivelyvacateduntilnothingis left–theremainingspaceis occu-
piedbythefourthventricle.
Thehindbrain atthelevelofthecaudalendof thefourth ventricle.Themostoutstanding
featurehereis theinferior olive.
-Thecaudalendofthefourthventricleis onlyathintubethatis continuous with
thecentralcanal,butitexpands inmorerostralsections tocoverthewholedorsal
surfaceofthehindbrain.
Thehindbrain atthelevelofthemiddleof thefourth ventricle.
THEPRECEREBELLARNUCLEIANDTHECEREBELLARPEDUNCLES
Therostralhindbraingives risetothecerebellum,whichexpands tocovermostofthedorsal
surfaceof thehindbrain.Threelargenucleiinthehindbrainprojecttothecerebellum.They
aretheexternalcuneatenucleus,theinferiorolive,andthebasilarpontinenuclei,andarecol-
lectivelyreferredtoas precerebellar nuclei.Thefibers travellingfromtheinferioroliveand
25

thepontinenucleicross themidlinetoreachthecerebellum.Becausethepontinenucleiare
huge,this crossingforms amassiveoutgrowthontheventralsurfaceofthehindbrain.
Thefibers travellingfromthehindbraintothecerebellumformtwothickbundles calledthe
inferiorandmiddlecerebellarpeduncles.Theinferiorcerebellarpedunclecontains the
crossedolivocerebellarfibers.
Hindbrain attheleveloftherostralpartof theinferior olive.
Therostralhindbraincontains thebasilar pontinenuclei.Theaxons fromthesenucleicross
themidlinetoformthehugemiddlecerebellar peduncle.
Rostralhindbrain showingthepontinenucleiandthemiddlecerebellar peduncles.
Theexternalcuneatenucleus receives positionsenseinformationfromtheupperlimband
neckandsends this informationtothecerebellumof thesameside.Theexternalcuneatenu-
cleus is locatedmedialtotheinferiorcerebellar peduncle.
26

Theexternalcuneatenucleus lies justmedialtothedarkinferior cerebellar peduncleatthe
dorsolateralcorner oftherostralhindbrain.
Theinferioroliveis alarge,foldednucleus intherostralhalfofthecaudalhindbrain.
Theinferior oliveforms a distinctivebulgeon theventralsurfaceofthehindbrain,lateral
tothepyramid.
Axons of inferiorolivecells traveltotheoppositecerebellarhemisphereviatheinferiorcere-
bellarpeduncle,wheretheyprovidetimingsignals for coordinationofmovement.
Thebasilar pontinenucleiconstitutethelargestgroupofneurons inthehumanbrainstem.
Theyreceiveinputfromthecerebralcortexandsendtheiraxons totheoppositecerebellar
hemisphere.Thefibers leavingthepontinenucleiformthemiddlecerebellarpeduncle.The
pontinenucleiandthecrossingpontocerebellarfibers formamassivebulgewhichcovers
mostof therostralhindbrain,seeninimages inthesectionabove.
SECTIONS OFTHEROSTRALHINDBRAIN SHOWINGTHEPONTINEEXPANSION
Next,wewillexaminesections of therostralhindbrain,wherethedominantfeatureis the
pontineexpansion.Themostusefullandmarkinidentifyingthelevelofthesesections is the
fourthventricle.Thefourthventricleis widestatthecaudalendofthepontineexpansion,and
itbecomes progressivelynarrow as itapproaches themidbrain,whereitforms thetube-like
aqueduct.
27

Cerebrospinalfluidfromtheventricles oftheforebraintravels downtheaqueducttoreachthe
fourthventricle.Thefluidescapes throughholes intheroofofthefourthventricletoreachthe
subarachnoidspace.
Sections throughthepontineexpansionlookverydifferentfromthoseattheleveloftheinfe-
rior olivebecausetheyaredominatedbythehugepontinenucleiandcrossingpontinefibers.
However,somefeatures arecontinuations ofstructures observedinthecaudalhindbrain.
Examinethefollowingimagetoidentifythesefeatures:
-thefibers thatformthepyramidarehereswallowedupbythepontinenucleiand
crossingfibers,buttheystillformadistinctbundle.However,itis notcalledthepyra-
midhere;instead,thesefibers arereferredtoas thelongitudinalfibers ofthepons,
whicharemadeupofcorticospinalandcorticopontinefibers.
-thefibers ofthemediallemniscus arestillpresent,buttheynolongerlievertically;
theyareforcedtoassumeahorizontalposition,sittingabovethepontineexpansion.
-thefourthventricleseparates thelongitudinalpartofthehindbrainfromthecerebel-
lum.Thecerebellumforms theroof oftherostralhalfofthefourthventricle
-theinferiorcerebellarpeduncleis stillpresent,butithas moveddorsallytoenterthe
cerebellum,lyinglateraltothefourthventricle.
Adominantfeatureofthis sectionis themiddlecerebellarpeduncle,butithas beencutjust
beforeitenters thecerebellum.Ontheleft-handsideofthis image,youcanseethefibers of
thetrigeminalnerveas theytravelthroughthemiddlecerebellarpeduncletoreachthesur-
face.
Thenextimageshows asectionthroughtherostralendofthepontineexpansion.Itshows
somefeatures thatwereseeninthelowersectionbuthas someotherdistinctivefeatures.
28

Asection through therostralhindbrain showingthedecussation ofthesuperior cerebellar
peduncles.
-thecorticospinalandcorticopontinefibers (longitudinalfibers ofthepons)forma
prominentbundleinthecenter ofthebasilar pontineformation
-themediallemniscus stilllies dorsaltothebasilarpons,butithas movedawayfrom
themidline
-themiddlecerebellarpeduncleis notseenherebecauseithas leftthebrainstemto
enterthecerebellum
-thefourthventriclehas shrunkdowntoasmalltubethatis abouttobecometheaque-
ductofthemidbrain.
Anentirelynew featureof this sectionis theappearanceofthesuperiorcerebellarpeduncle,
whichis averyprominentfibergroupjustdorsaltothemediallemniscus -.This peduncle
consists offibers thathaveleftthecerebellumandareheadingtowardtheirterminationinthe
thalamus.Atthis level,thesuperiorcerebellar peduncleis crossingthemidline–thecrossing
is therefor calledthedecussationof thesuperior cerebellarpeduncle.This crossingis anim-
portantlandmarkbecauseitoccurs inthemostrostralsegmentofthehindbrain(theisthmus).
29

SECTIONSTHROUGHTHEMIDBRAIN
Thenextimageis asectionthroughthecaudalmidbrain.Itis particularlyinterestingbecause
this partof themidbrainoverlaps theisthmus andtherostralpartofthebasilarpontineforma-
tion.Thedorsalpartofthesectionis atthecaudalpartoftheinferiorcolliculus ofthemId-
brain,butthemiddleofthesectionshows features of themostrostralsegmentofthehind-
brain–thedecussationofthesuperiorcerebellar peduncleandthenucleus ofthetrochlear
nerve.
Asection through thecaudalmidbrain,showingtheoverlapwith rostralhindbrain struc-
tures –thedecussation ofthesuperior cerebellar peduncles andtherostralpontinenuclei.
Themostventralpartofthesectioncuts throughthemostrostralpartofthebasilarpontine
formation.Lateraltothecrossingpontinefibers is averylargefiberbundleformedbythecor-
ticospinalandcorticopontinefibers.This bundleis calledthecerebralpeduncle(crus cerebri).
Thenextsectionis exclusivelyamidbrainsectionatthelevelofthesuperiorcolliculus.Inthe
centeris theaqueduct,whichis surroundedbythepaleperiaqueductalgraymatter.Abovethe
periaqueductalgrayarethetwosuperior colliculi,whichhaveacharacteristicallylaminated
appearance.
Asection through thesuperior colliculus of themidbrain.
Below theperiaqueductalgrayaretwodarkroundmasses.Theycontainthefibers ofthesu-
periorcerebellarpeduncle,whichis ascendingtowardthethalamus.However,this regionco-
30

incides withthelocationoflargecells of therednucleus,acellgroupthatgives risetothede-
scendingrubrospinaltract.Theappearanceofthecells is obscuredbythefibers ofthesupe-
rior cerebellarpeduncle.
Lateraltotherednucleus,atthelateraledgeofthemidbrain,is theverylargecerebralpedun-
cle,whichcontains corticospinalandcorticopontinefibers thatareheadingtowards thehind-
brain.Ontheinnermarginof thedarkcerebralpeduncleis anextensivepaleareacalledthe
substantianigra.Thereasonfortheapparentlycontradictorynameis thatinfreshbrainspeci-
mens,theareais stainedblackbyirondeposits.Someofthecells ofthesubstantianigracon-
taindopamine,andwhichprojecttomotor centers in theforebrain.
Betweentherednucleus (superior cerebellarpeduncle)andthecerebralpeduncleis theelon-
gatedmediallemniscus,whichhas beenpushedlaterally.
Animportantfeatureofthis sectionis thepresenceofstreaks offibers thatstartfromunder
theperiaqueductalgrayandwhichcoursethroughtherednucleus.Thesearefibers oftheocu-
lomotornerve,whichareheadingtotheirpointof emergencebetweenthetwocerebralpe-
duncles (this spaceis calledtheinterpeduncular fossa).
Questions forrepetition
- Whatis thedifferencebetweenthespinalcordandthecaudalendofthehindbrain?
- Inwhichsensorypathways arethesuperiorandinferiorcolliculiinvolved?
- Whatarethenames ofthethreelargenucleithatprojectfromthehindbrainintothecere-
bellum?
- Whatis thenameofthepartof thehindbrainthatis mostrostrallylocated?
31

The brain stem cranial nerves
Cranialnerves 1and2(theolfactoryandopticnerves)areconnectedwiththeforebrain.The
remainingtencranialnerves (cranialnerves 3to12) arisefromthebrainstem.
Theventralsurfaceofthehuman brain showingtheorigins ofthecranialnerves.
Theoculomotornerve(3n)emerges outof theinterpeduncularfossafromtheventralsurface
ofthemidbrain.Thetrochlearnerve(4n) winds aroundthecerebralpeduncleafterexitingthe
dorsalsurfaceoftheisthmus (themostrostralsegmentofthehindbrain).Thetrigeminalnerve
emerges fromthebasilarpons.Thetrigeminalnerve(5n)is madeupoftwoparts,alargesen-
soryroot,andasmallermotorroot.Theabducens nerve(6n)emerges fromthecaudalborder
ofthepons.Thefacialnerve(7n)andthevestibulocochlearnerve(8n)leavethehindbrain
fromthelateralpartofthetrapezoidbody.Therootlets oftheglossopharyngealnerve(9n),
vagus nerve(10n),andaccessorynerve(11n) formalineatthelateralmarginofthecaudal
hindbrain.Therootlets ofthehypoglossalnerveemergefromthelateralborderofthepyra-
mid.
Cranialnerve3–theoculomotornerve
Thepairedoculomotornucleiarefoundatthelevelof thesuperiorcolliculus,closetothe
midline,andventraltotheperiaqueductalgreymatter.
Thefibers of theoculomotornervecoursethroughtherednucleus ontheirwaytotheinterpe-
duncular fossa.Themainoculomotornucleus contains somaticmotorneurons thatsupplyall
theeyemuscles exceptthesuperior obliqueandthelateralrectus muscles.Thesmaller
Edinger–Westphalnucleus contains preganglionicparasympatheticneurons thatsupplythe
constrictor ofthepupiland theciliarymuscle.Damagetotheoculomotornerveresults inadi-
vergentsquint(theeyeontheparalyzedsideis pulled laterallyanddownwards awayfromthe
lineof vision),droopingoftheeyelid(ptosis –duetopartialparalysis oftheeyelidraising
muscle),anddilatationofthepupil.
32

Paralysis oftherightoculomotor nerve–divergentsquint,dilatedpupil,anddroopingeye-
lid.
Cranialnerve4–thetrochlearnerve
Thetrochlearnucleus is locatedimmediatelycaudaltotheoculomotorcomplexdorsolateral
tothemediallongitudinalfasciculus.Whilethetrochlearnucleus was traditionallythoughtto
belocatedinthemidbrain,itis now clearthatitbelongs tothemostrostralsegmentofthe
hindbrain,calledtheisthmus.Thesmalltrochlear nerveexits thedorsalsurfaceofthebrain-
stem.Itcrosses themidlineinthesuperior medullaryvelumbeforewindingaroundthecere-
bralpeduncletosupplythesuperior obliquemuscleoftheeye.
Cranialnerve5–thetrigeminalnerve
Thetrigeminalnervesupplies theskinof thefaceand themuscles ofmastication(thechewing
muscles).Thesensoryfibers ofthetrigeminalnerveconnecttoaseries oflargenucleiextend-
ingfromtherostralhindbraintothespinalcord.Theprincipalsensorytrigeminalnucleus is
foundatthelevelwherethetrigeminalnerveconnects withthehindbrain.Thetrigeminalmo-
tornucleus lies medialtotheprincipalsensorynucleus.Thetworemainingnucleiofthe
trigeminalcomplexarethespinal(descending) andmesencephalicnuclei.Thespinalnucleus
is foundinthedorsolateralhindbrainatalllevels below theprincipalnucleus andis continu-
ous caudallywiththesubstantiagelatinosaofthespinalcord.Themesencephalicnucleus of
thetrigeminalsystemis smallanddifficulttoseeinlow powersections.Itconsists ofasingle
layer of largeroundcells ontheedgeof theperiaqueductalgraymatterofthemidbrain.
Cranialnerve6–theabducens nerve
Theabducens nervesupplies thelateralrectus muscleoftheeye.Theabducens nucleus lies
nexttothemidlineclosetothemediallongitudinalfasciculus.Thefibers oftheemergingab-
ducens nervecanbeseenrunningdorsoventrallythroughthetegmentumofthehindbrain.
Cranialnerve7–thefacialnerve
Thefacialnervesupplies themuscles oftheface.Italsosupplies tastesensoryfibers tothe
frontof thetongueandparasympatheticfibers tothesubmandibularsalivaryglandandother
smallglands inthehead.Themotorfibers leavingthemainfacialnucleus takeanunusual
coursethroughthehindbrain.Theytraveldorsomediallytocurlaroundtheabducens nucleus
beforeheadingventrolaterallytoexitthebrainstemventraltothetrigeminalsensorynucleus.
Tastefibers inthefacialnerveconnectwiththenucleus ofthesolitarytract.
Cranialnerve8–thevestibulocochlearnerve
Thevestibulocochlearnervereceives sensoryfibers fromtheorgans ofbalance(mainlythe
semicircularcanals)andhearing(thecochlea).Inatransversesectionofthejunctionofthe
pons andmedulla,thevestibulocochlearnerveenters thebrainstemas twoseparatebundles,
whichstraddletheinferiorcerebellarpeduncle.Thoseenteringventraltothepedunclearethe
vestibularfibers,whilethoseseendorsalandlateralto thepedunclearethecochlearfibers.
Thedorsalandventralcochlearnucleiarepaleareas embeddedwithinthefibers ofthe
cochlearnerveas is arches aroundthepeduncle.Thedorsalcochlearnucleus is themore
prominentofthetwo;itis easilyrecognizableinsections as itsurmounts theinferiorcerebel-
larpeduncle.Fournucleicomprisethevestibular nuclearcomplex.Theyarenamedsuperior,
lateral,medial,andspinal(descending)vestibular nuclei.Thesefournucleiarearranged
withinadiamond-shapedareainthefloor ofthefourthventricle.
33

Cranialnerve9–theglossopharyngealnerve
Theglossopharyngealnervereceives tastefibers fromtheposteriorthirdofthetongue,which
terminates inthenucleus of thesolitarytract.Theglossopharyngealnervecontains parasym-
patheticfibers thatsupplytheparotidsalivarygland,andwhichariseintheinferiorsalivatory
nucleus.Italsosupplies asinglepharyngealmuscle,thepalatoglossus,withfibers thatarisein
thenucleus ambiguous.
Cranialnerve10–thevagus nerve
Thevagus nervesupplies parasympatheticfibers tothethoracicandabdominalviscera.The
parasympatheticnucleus ofthevagus (thedorsalmotornucleus ofthevagus)lies justmedial
tothesulcus limitans insections oftheopenmedulla.Thenucleus ofthesolitarytractlies just
lateraltothedorsalmotornucleus ofthevagus.Itreceives tastefibers fromthefacial,glos-
sopharyngealandvagus nerves,andgeneralvisceralafferentfibers fromthevagus nerve.The
nucleus ambiguous contains largemultipolar motorneurons,whichsupplythepharynx,
palate,andlarynxmuscles viathevagus,cranialaccessory,andglossopharyngealnerves.
Cranialnerve11–theaccessorynerve
Thecranialpartoftheaccessorynervearises fromthenucleus ambiguous andis considered
bymanytobejustapartofthevagus nerve.Itcontributes tothevagalsupplyofthepharynx.
Thespinalrootoftheaccessorynerveis amotornervesupplyingsternomastoidandtrapezius
muscles intheneck.Itarises frommotoneurons incervicalspinalcordlevels C2toC4.It
travels intothecranialcavitytojoinbrieflywiththevagus nervebeforedescendingintothe
posterior triangleoftheneck.
Cranialnerve12–thehypoglossalnerve
Thehypoglossalnervesupplies themuscles ofthetongue.Thehypoglossalnucleus lies im-
mediatelydorsaltothemediallongitudinalfasciculus andis medialtothedorsalmotornu-
cleus of thevagus inthefloorof thefourthventricle.Thehypoglossalnervefibers travelven-
trallytoemergebetweentheinferioroliveandpyramid.
Functionalclassificationofmotor andsensorynervefibers
Thefibers thattravelinthecranialnerves canbeclassifiedonthebasis oftheirfunctions.
Efferent(motor)fibers areclassifiedas either somaticefferent,visceralefferent,orbranchial
efferent.
Afferent(sensory)fibers areclassifiedas somaticsensory,visceralsensory,orspecialsensory.
Thefollowingtablesummarises thefunctionalcomponents ofeachofthecranialnerves
34

Questions forrepetition
- Whichcranialnerves areconnectedtothebrainstem?
- Nametheconsequences of paralysis ofthethirdcranialnerve.
- Whatis thefifthcranialnervealsocalled?
- Whatis thefunctionofthesixthcranialnerve?
- Whatdotheparasympatheticfibers oftheglossopharyngealnerveinnervate?
- How manyfunctionalcomponents does theeleventhcranialnervehave?
35

The cerebellum
Thecerebellumis anoutgrowthof therostralhindbrain,arisingfromtheregionjustcaudalto
themidbrain(theisthmus andthefirstrhombomere).Thedevelopingcerebellumis relatively
smallatbirth,butitgrows rapidlyinthepostnatalperiod.
Thecentralwhitematterofthecerebellumis arrangedlikethetrunkofatree,withaseries of
majorbranches coveredwithgreymatter.Inamid–sagittalsection,thecerebellumlooks like
asliceof cauliflower,withbranches ofwhitematter formingthemajorlobules ofthecentral
partofthecerebellum.Thepartof thecerebelluminthemidlineis calledthevermis.Thever-
mis consists oftenrecognizablelobules inallmammals.
Thecerebralcortexrelies onthecerebellumforthecoordinationofmovement.Thecerebral
cortexrequests informationfromthecerebellumviathehugecorticopontinepathwaythat
travels totherostralhindbrainandwhichsynapses inthepontinenuclei.Thepontinenuclei
sendtheiraxons totheoppositesideof thecerebellumviathemiddlecerebellarpeduncle.
Thecerebellumresponds torequests fromtheforebrainviathesuperiorcerebellarpeduncle,
whichtravels totheventrolateralthalamicnucleus of theoppositeside.Theinferiorcerebellar
pedunclecarries fibers thatariseinthespinalcordandbrainstemontheirwaytothecerebel-
larcortex.
Thedorsalspinocerebellar tractandthepathways connectingthecerebellum,thalamus,
motor cortex,andpons.
36

Lobules of the cerebellar vermis and the cerebellar hemisphere
Thevermis ofthecerebelluminallmammals is dividedintotenlobules byaseries ofdeep
fissures.Thelargestofthesefissures is theprimaryfissure,whichdivides theanteriorvermis
(lobules 1-5)fromtheposterior vermis (lobules 6-10).Eachofthelobules has atraditional
Latinname,buttheonlyoneworthrememberingis thenodule,whichis thenameforlobule
10.Thehumancerebellarhemisphereis extraordinarilyelaborate,markedbyhundreds ofin-
dividualfoliathatrunfrommedialtolateral.
Asagittalsection ofratcerebellumshowingtheten lobules ofthevermis.Thedeepprimary
fissureseparates lobules 1-5(on theleft) fromlobules 6-10(on theright).
Thecenterofthecerebellumis filledwithfibers –calledthedeepcerebellarwhitematter.
Embeddedinthewhitematterarethreedeepcerebellarnucleioneachside.Thelargestof
thesenucleiis thedentatenucleus,whichis laterallyplaced.
Cerebellar peduncles
Thecerebellumis connectedtothehindbrainbythreecerebellarpeduncles oneachside:the
inferiorpedunclemainlycontains fibers enteringthecerebellumfromthespinalcordandthe
inferiorolive;thehugemiddlepedunclecontains fiberprojectingfromthebasilarpons tothe
cerebellum;thesuperiorpedunclecontains fibers thatleavethecerebellumtotravelthrough
therednucleus toreachthethalamus.
37

Adiagramofthehuman cerebellumshowingthevermis andthehemispheres (a)andthe
deepcerebellar nuclei(c).
The cerebellum has an ipsilateral connection with the body
Eachsideofthecerebralcortexis connectedtosensoryandmotoractivities ontheopposite
sideofthebody,buteachsideofthecerebellumis connectedtothesamesideofthebody.
Whenonecerebellarhemisphereis damaged,theclassicsymptoms ofcerebellardamage,
whichareincoordinationof voluntarymovementand tremor,occuronthesamesideas the
damage.
(a)Asagittalsection
The role of the cerebellum in motor control
Thecerebellumis responsibleforthecoordinationof complexmovements.Itdoes this by
comparingthemotorcommands withtheactualbodymovements thatresult.Onthebasis of
this comparison,itcanadjustmotorcontroltoimproveaccuracy.This monitoringandfeed-
backoccur in real-timeandis mostimportantatthecrucialendstages ofapurposefulmove-
ment.Thecerebellumplays avitalroleinthemanagementofpostureandbalance;itreceives
inputfromthevestibularsystemsothatitcanmonitorthepositionofthebodyinspace,andit
canmakemajorposturaladjustments if thepersonis indangeroflosingtheirbalance.
Inprimates,thecerebellumis vitalforcoordinatingthemovements ofthehands andeyes.For
monkeys,lifeinthetrees depends entirelyontheabilitytoplanandexecuteacrobaticleaps
involvingthecerebellum,vestibularsystem,eyes,andhands.Humans havethemostsophisti-
catedversion ofbinocularvisionamongtheprimates andhavelongfingers andopposable
thumbs.Thehumancerebellumhas evolvedtocapitalizeonthesecapacities throughthepre-
cisecoordinationofskilledfingermovements.Thefinecoordinationoffingermovementun-
der thecontrolofbinocularvisionhas givenhumans access totoolmanufacture.
The histological structure of the cerebellar cortex
thecerebellarcortexis madeupofthreelayers,theoutermolecularlayer,thePurkinjecell
layer,andtheinnergranulecelllayer.Deeptothegranulecelllayeris thedeepcerebellar
whitematter.
Thestructureofthecerebellarcortexis extraordinarilyuniform;thesamethreelayers are
seeninallparts ofthecerebellum,andtheirrelativethickness does notvary.Deeptothecor-
texis thedeepcerebellarwhitematter.
ThelargePurkinjecells aretheoutputcells ofthecerebellarcortex.Theiraxons projecttothe
cerebellarnuclei.
38

Cerebellar cortex.TheNisslstainedsection aboveshows themolecular layer (MoCb),the
Purkinjecelllayer (Pk),thegranulecelllayer (GrCb),andthedeepcerebellar whitematter
(cbw).Thediagrambelow shows thedendritictreeofaPurkinjecellin themolecular layer
andthetermination ofthePurkinjecellaxon in adeepcerebellar nucleus.
Mossy fibers and climbing fibers
Mostofthefibers projectingtothecerebellarcortexaremossyfibers thatsynapsewithgran-
ulecells.Theexceptionis theinputfromtheinferior olive,whichgoes directlytotheden-
dritictrees ofthePurkinjecells intheformof climbingfibers.Themossyfibers arisefrom
cells inthepontinenucleiandotherlargeprecerebellarnucleiinthehindbrainandfromthe
spinalcord.Thegranulecells sendtheiraxons tothedendrites ofPurkinjecells.Thegranule
cells aretinybutverytightlypacked-aboutonemillionpercubicmillimeter;thegranule
cells compriseabout70%ofalltheneurons inthebrain.As notedabove,theaxons fromthe
inferiorolivarynucleus formclimbingfibers,whichmakedirectcontactwiththedendritic
trees ofthePurkinjecells.Thereis evidencethattheinferiorolivarycells controlthetime
codeof thecerebellum,thus ensuringthateverylearnedmovementis playedbackinexactly
therighttimingsequence—theinferior olivecells fireatabout10Hz(tenactionpotentials per
second).
Microelectroderecordings intheratsuggestthateveryfoliuminthecerebellumcodes adif-
ferentmovementsequence.Forexample,someareconcernedwithtakingfoodwiththefin-
gers andtransferringittothemouth,andothers areinvolvedinrunningbehavior.Giventhe
tens ofthousands offoliainthehumancerebellum,itis possiblethatthecerebellumkeeps
learningnew movementsequences intoadultlife.Perhaps thereis evenabackhandfoliumin
keentennis players!
Thelargestconnectionofthehumancerebellumis theconnectionwiththemotorcortex.The
hugecorticopontinepathwayarises fromthecerebralcortex,synapses inthepons,andenters
thecerebellumthroughthemiddlecerebellarpeduncle.This seems tobeawayforthemotor
cortextoaskforhelpfromthecerebellumwhencoordinationofacomplexmovementis re-
quired.Theanswercomes backtothemotorcortexviathesuperiorcerebellarpeduncle.The
fibers ofthesuperiorcerebellar pedunclesynapseintheventrolateralnucleus ofthethalamus,
andthethalamocorticalfibers traveltothemotorcortex.
Therelationshipbetweencellnumbers inthecerebralcortexandthecerebellumis verycon-
sistentacross themammaliangroups.Althoughthesizeofthecerebralcortexvaries agreat
dealfromonemammalianfamilytoanother,theproportionalrelationshipbetweenthenum-
ber ofcerebralcorticalcells andthenumberof cerebellarcells is thesame–about1:4.
Themainwaythecerebellumtracks movementinthelimbs is fromsensations fromtheskin.
Itusedtobethoughtthatthemostimportantinformationonmovementwouldcomefrom
39

jointreceptors andmusclestretchreceptors,butitnow appears thatmostoftheinputcomes
fromreceptors thatdetectsensations of stretching,contact,orfoldingintheskin.Thesesensa-
tions provideveryfinedetailonthemovementofthelimbs andotherbodyparts.
Questions for repetition
- Of how manylayers is thecortexof thecerebellumconstituted?
- Is thecerebellumalsoconnected"side-wiseinverted" withthemuscles oftheotherhalfof
thebody?
- Towhichcells dothegranulecells sendtheir axonpotentials?
- How canthecerebellumcoordinatethecorrecttiming ofmovementsignals?
- Whatareclassicsymptoms ofdamagetothecerebellum?
40

DIENCEPHALON
The diencephalon
Thediencephalonsits betweenthemidbrainandthehypothalamus.Thecentralpartofthedi-
encephalonis thethalamus.Theother parts ofthediencephalonaretheprethalamus infront
ofthethalamus andthepretectalareabehind.Eachofthethreeparts ofthediencephalonis a
completesegmentoftheneuraltube,withalar andbasalcomponents,calledthediencephalic
prosomeres:thepretectalareais includedindiencephalicprosomere1;thethalamicareais in-
cludedindiencephalicprosomere2;theprethalamus is includedindiencephalicprosomere3.
Theword‘diencephalon’means ‘interbrain’–referringtothefactthatthis regionlinks the
mainparts oftheforebrain withthebrainstem.
Adiagramshowingthesegmentalcomponents ofthedevelopingbrain.Thediencephalic
segments p1,p2,andp3areshown.Notethehabenular stalkatthecaudalendofthedorsal
surfaceofthethalamus.
Thalamus
Inamid-sagittalsectionofthebrain,thethalamus sits dorsaltothehypothalamus.This ledto
along-heldmisunderstandingthatthehypothalamus is actuallyventraltothethalamus in
topologicalterms.However,therelationshipbetweenthetwois notas itseems.Becauseof
thesharp(almost180degrees) bendingof theneuraxis atthemidbrainduringdevelopment
(thecephalicflexure),thehypothalamus is actuallyrostraltothediencephalonindevelop-
mentalterms.
Thethalamus receives inputfromallthesensorysystems excepttheolfactorysystem.Eachof
thevisual,auditory,andtouch(somatosensory)sensorypathways terminates inits ownspe-
cialpartofthethalamus:thevisualpathwayends inthedorsallateralgeniculatenucleus;the
auditorypathwayends inthemedialgeniculatenucleus;thetouchpathwayends intheventro-
posterior nucleus.Eachofthesesensorythalamicnucleithensends sensoryinformationtothe
corticalareareservedforthatmodality.Inaddition,informationonmovementcoordination
fromthecerebellumalsoreaches theventrolateralnucleus ofthethalamus,andtheinforma-
tionis sentontothepartofthecortexconcernedwith motorcontrol–theprimarymotorcor-
tex.
41

Itis notnecessarytomemorizethenames of allthethalamicnuclei;thekeyones arethenu-
cleithatconnecttothemainsensorypathways–ventroposterior(VP,somatosensory),dorsal
lateralgeniculate(DLG,vision),andmedialgeniculate(MG,hearing),towhichshouldbe
addedtheventrolateralnucleus (VL),whichreceives inputfromthecerebellumandglobus
pallidus andprojects tothemotor cortex.Theremainingthalamicnucleiprojecttoassociation
areas ofthecerebralcortex.
Thedorsomedialedgeofthethalamus carries thehabenularnuclei,towhichareattachedthe
stalkofthepinealgland.Thepinealglandsecretes melatonin,whichinfluences thesleepcy-
cle.
Prethalamus
Themostrostraldiencephalicprosomere(p3) contains thezonaincerta–animportantregion
formotor control.InParkinson’s disease,stimulating electrodes thatareinsertedintothezona
incertacanminimizetremors andmusclestiffness inpatients withParkinsonism.This is
calleddeepbrainstimulation(DBS),andthetreatmentis usuallyverysuccessful.Thereticu-
larnucleiofp3playanimportantroleduringsleepby controllingtheoutputofthethalamus
tothecortex.Aftersleepis established,theinhibitory (GABAergic)neurons ofp3takecon-
troloftheactivityofthemainthalamicnucleitosetuparhythmicwavepatternofelectrical
activityinthecortex.
Pretectal area
Themostcaudaldiencephalicprosomere(p1) contains thenucleiofthepretectalarea.These
nucleiplayaroleinvisualreflexes.Aprominentp1landmarkatthejunctionoftheprethala-
mus withthemidbrainis theposterior commissure,whichbelongs top1andnottothemid-
brain,as previouslysupposed.
Questions for repetition
- Of whatparts does thediencephalonconsistof?
- Describethespatialrelationshipofthethalamus andhypothalamus fromadevelopmental
perspective?
- Whichthalamicnucleus is integratedintothevisualpathway?
- Whichpartofthediencephalonis stimulatedwithdeepbrainstimulationtocombat
Parkinsonism?
- Inwhichfunctionis thepretectalareainvolved?
42

HYPOTHALAMUS
The hypothalamus
Thename'hypothalamus' is derivedfromanoutdatedview thatthehypothalamus was simply
aventraladditiontothethalamus.New datafromdevelopmentalgeneexpressionhas re-
vealedafarmorecriticalrolefor thehypothalamus.Itis now clearthatthehypothalamus is
formedfromthemostrostralpartoftheneuraltube,anditis responsibleforgeneratingthe
wholeof thetelencephalonfromits alar plate.Itis byfarthemostcrucialcenterinthedevel-
opinghumanbrain.
Oneofthereasons formisunderstandingtheproperanatomicalplaceofthehypothalamus is a
lackof appreciationoftheeffectof thecervicalflexureofthedevelopingneuraltube.This se-
verebendintheembryonicneuraxis pushes thehypothalamus toits adultpositionunderthe
thalamus.
Thehypothalamus comprises thefirsttwoneuralsegments –theterminalprosomereandthe
peduncular prosomere.Theterminalhypothalamicprosomeregives risetotheeyeandthete-
lencephalonfromits alarplate,givingrisetotheposteriorpituitaryglandfromits basalplate.
Thepeduncularhypothalamicprosomereis connected toprosomere3ofthediencephalon
Features ofthehypothalamus seeninamid-sagittalsection
Inamid-sagittalsectionofthebrain,theprominentanatomicallandmarks ofthehypothala-
mus canbeseen–theopticchiasmrostrally,themammillarybodies caudally,andthepitu-
itarystalkbetweenthetwo.
Themostrostralpartofthehypothalamus sits abovetheopticchiasm.Thehypothalamicnu-
cleus sittingimmediatelyabovethechiasmis appropriatelycalledthesuprachiasmaticnu-
cleus.This nucleus serves as a24-hourclockforthebrain;its neurons haveaninternaltiming
systemthatcanbeadjustedwithlightintensityinformationfromtheopticnerves.Ifanani-
malis keptincompletedarkness,theclockreverts toa25-hourcycle.Theclockis essential
forthetimingofpeaks ofhormonalsecretions fromendocrineglands.
Thecentralpartofthehypothalamus thatbears thepituitarystalkis calledthetubercinereum.
Thehypothalamus andsurvivalbehaviors
Duringvertebrateevolution,complexbehaviors andmovementsets becameorganizedinahi-
erarchyof modules inthebrain.Atthetopofthehierarchyarebehaviors relatingtothesur-
vivaloftheindividualandthespecies.Theseincludeeating,drinking,defensivebehaviors,
reproduction,andthebasicmovementpatterns neededtoexploretheimmediateenvironment.
Thesesurvivalbehaviors areprimarilycontrolledbythehypothalamus.Thehypothalamic
controlcenters forsurvivalbehaviors areclusteredintwomaingroups.Thefirstgroupin-
cludes systems fordefense,reproduction,andingestion(feedinganddrinking).Thenuclei
thatcontrolthesebehaviorsets,includingthelargeventromedialnucleus,arelocatedinthe
medialhalfofthehypothalamus.Eachspecificbehaviorset,suchas eating,is relatedtoone
particularsetofhypothalamicnuclei.Thesecondgroupofsurvivalbehaviororganizers is lo-
catedinthemammillarybodyinthecaudalpartofthehypothalamus andinnearbymidbrain
parts (thesubstantianigraandtheventraltegmentalarea).This secondgroupinitiates ex-
ploratoryandforagingbehaviors,suchas turningtheheadandeyes towardanobjectofinter-
estandwalkingorrunningtoexplorethesurroundings.
43

Asagittalsection oftheratbrain showingthemain parts ofthehypothalamus.
Thepituitarystalkis attachedclosetoVMH.
MB=mammillarybody;Pa=paraventricular nucleus;SCh=suprachiasmaticnucleus;
VMH=ventromedialhypothalamicnucleus.
44

Controlof theendocrinesystembythehypothalamus
Thehypothalamus has severalpowerfulneurongroups thatcontrolthehormonalsecretions of
thepituitarygland.Langdon-Brownfamouslydescribedthepituitaryglandas 'theleaderin
theendocrineorchestra' (Hubble,1961).This is aclevermetaphorthatreserves theroleofthe
conductor oftheorchestrafor thehypothalamus.Inanorchestra,theconductorgives direc-
tions tothefirstviolin,whois theorchestra's leader.
Hypothalamiccontrolovertheposterior pituitaryis direct.Largeneurosecretorycells inthe
paraventricularandsupraopticnucleisendtheir axons totheposteriorpituitary,releasingoxy-
tocinandvasopressinintothebloodstream.Oxytocinstimulates contractionoftheuterus at
birthandinitiates milksecretionafterbirth.Italsoplays animportantroleinadultpair-bond-
ingandmaternal-infantattachment.Vasopressin,alsocalledantidiuretichormone(ADH),in-
creases bloodpressureandcontrols urineproduction.
Hypothalamicsecretion of theposterior pituitaryhormones oxytocin andADH(vaso-
pressin).Thehormones areproducedbyneurosecretorycells in theparaventricular nu-
cleus andarereleasedfromaxon terminals thatreach theposterior pituitary.
45

Thecontrolovertheanterior pituitaryis notas direct:cells intheparaventricularnucleus re-
leasetinyamounts ofreleasinghormones intoaspecializedportalbloodsystemthatcarries
themtotheanteriorpituitary.Aportalbloodsystemhas twosets ofcapillaries connectedbya
portalvein.Inthecaseofthepituitary,thefirstcapillarybedcollects thereleasinghormones
fromthehypothalamus.Smallportalveins transportthereleasinghormones tothesecond
capillarybedintheanteriorpituitary,wheretheyreachendocrinesecretingcells.Thereleas-
inghormones stimulatethereleaseofthemajorhormones fromanteriorpituitarycells -
growthhormone(GH),thyroid-stimulatinghormone(TSH),adrenocorticotrophichormone
(ACTH),follicle-stimulatinghormone(FSH),prolactin(PRL),andluteinizinghormone(LH).
Thehypothalamus secretes releasinghormones which stimulatetheendocrinecells ofthe
anterior pituitarytoreleasetheir hormoneproducts.Thereleasinghormones aredelivered
tohypothalamiccapillaries thatdrain intoveins which formaspecialportalvenous system.
Theportalveins endin asecondcapillarysystemin theanterior pituitary.
Questions forrepetition
- Fromwhichprosomeres does thehypothalamus arise?
- Whichhypothalamicnucleus is responsiblefor determiningthecircadianrhythm?
- Whichhypothalamicstructures areinvolvedinbehaviors suchas foragingandexplo-
ration?
- Whathormones aresecretedintheposteriorpituitary gland?
- Whatkindofhormones aresecretedintheanteriorpituitarygland?
46

Telencephalon
The Telencephalon
TELENCEPHALON –THECEREBRALHEMISPHERES
Thetwotelencephalicoutgrowths arisefromthedevelopinghypothalamus.Thetelencephalic
outgrowthoneachsideforms thecerebralhemisphereorcerebrum.Thecerebralhemisphere
ofeachsideconsists ofanouterlayeror palliumandasubpalliallayer.Thepalliumincludes
thecortex.Thesubpalliumforms severaldeepcellgroups,thelargestofwhicharethestria-
tumandpallidum(sometimes calledthebasalganglia).
Thetwotelencephalicoutgrowths arisefromthealar plateoftherostralhypothalamicseg-
ment.This diagramshows onlyonetelencephalicoutgrowth.Thetelencephalon forms the
pallium(thefuturecortex)andthesubpallium(mainlythestriatumandpallidum).
Thepalliumcanbedividedintomedial,dorsal,lateral,andventral.Inmammals,mostofthe
cerebralcortexis derivedfromthedorsalpalliumand is calledtheneocortex.Theareas deriv-
ingfromtheventralpalliummainlybelongtotheolfactorysystem.Theolfactorycortexis
sometimes referredtoas allocortex.
Thesmallerlateralpallium,whichlies betweentheneocortexandtheolfactorycorticalareas,
forms asmallareaoftheneocortexcalledtheinsula,whichis mainlydevotedtotasteandvis-
ceralsensation.Themedialpallialsubdivisiongives risetothehippocampus.
Neocortex
Thehumanneocortexis massivelyexpanded.Foldingincreases its surfacearea,forming
raisedareas (gyri)andgrooves (sulci).
47

Acoronalsection through theforebrain ofamouseshowingthefour pallialareas –medial
pallium(MP),dorsalpallium(DP),lateralpallium(LP),andventralpallium(VP).The
corpus callosumseparates themedialpallium(hippocomapus)formthedorsalpallium
(neocortex).
Thepattern ofsulciandgyrivaries fromperson toperson,butsomegyrican beconsis-
tentlyidentified.
48

Thecerebrumcanbedividedintolobes,whicharenamedfortheoverlyingcranialbones –
frontal,parietal,temporal, andoccipital.
Thelobes ofthecerebrumas viewedfromthelateralside.Thecentralsulcus separates the
frontalandparietallobes.Thelateralfissureseparates thetemporallobefromthefrontal
andparietallobes.
Theneocortexhas well-definedsensoryareas for thereceptionoftouch(S1),vision(V1),
hearing(A1),andtaste.Thevisualcortexis locatedin theoccipitalpoleofthecortex,andthe
auditorycortexis locatedin thetemporallobe.Thetouch(somatosensorycortex)is located
rostrallynearthefrontalpole.Theneocortexhas noolfactorysensoryareabecauseallolfac-
toryinformationprojects totheventralcorticalareas –theolfactorybulb,olfactorytubercle,
andpiriformcortex.Infrontof thesomatosensorycortexis theprimarymotorcortex–an
areadevotedtovoluntarymotor controloftheoppositesideofthebody.Electricalstimulation
ofthemotorcortexproduces movements ontheoppositesideofthebody.Themotorcortex
sends amajorpathwaytothebrainstem(corticobulbartract)andanothertothespinalcord
(corticospinaltract)toinitiatemovements.
Theprimarysensoryandmotor areas in thecortex. Theprimarysomatosensoryarea(S1)
is separatedfromtheprimarymotor area(M1)bythecentralsulcus.Theprimaryauditory
areais separatedfromS1bythedeeplateralfissure(notlabeledhere).Theprimaryvisual
areais almostentirelylocatedon themedialsideoftheoccipitallobe.Thetasteareacannot
beseen in this diagrambecauseitis hidden in thelateralfissure.
49

Atahistologicallevel,theneocortexis madeupofsix well-definedlayers,numberedoneto
six.Theprimarysensoryareas arecharacterizedbydenselayers ofgranulecells -layers 2and
4.Theprimarymotorcortexis characterizedbyaprominentpyramidalcelllayer(layer5)and
avirtualabsenceofthemaingranulecelllayer(layer 4)andsois oftenreferredtoas the
agranular cortex.Manypyramidalcells inlayer5areverylarge,sendingaxons overgreatdis-
tances toreachmotorneurons inthespinalcord.
Acoronalsection ofthemouseforebrain showingthehistologicaldifferencebetween the
primarymotor cortex(M1) andprimarysomatosensorycortex(S2).Thegranular layer 4is
missingfromM1butveryprominentin S1.
TheHippocampus
Thehippocampus is thepartof thecerebralcortexthatis involvedinmemorysystems.The
hippocampus arises fromthemedialpallium.Itconsists ofthedentategyrus,thethreeCAre-
gions,thesubiculum,andtheentorhinalcortex.Thehippocampus is responsibleforshort-
termmemoryregistration.
Theentorhinalcortexis locatedintheparahippocampalgyrus is likeaGPS thatcontains a
precisetwo-dimensionalgridmapofsurroundings;ithelps tolinkthememoryofevents to
theplaceinwhichtheyoccurred.Theentorhinalcortexsends placeinformationtothehip-
pocampus inachainofconnections fromthedentategyrus,theCA3region,andfinallytothe
CA1region.TheCA1regionsends its informationtothesubiculum,whichis theoutputcen-
terforthehippocampus.Thesubiculumprojects totheseptumandhypothalamus viaalarge
fiberbundlecalledthefornix.
Subpallialstructures
Underthecoveringofthepalliumareanumber oflargespecializedneurongroups.The
largestof thesegroups arethestriatumandpallidum,whichplayessentialroles inthecontrol
ofmovements.Thesmaller subpallialgroups (theamygdala,septum,andpreopticarea)are
concernedwithemotionalexpressionandbehavior patterns.
50

Striatumandpallidum–the'basalganglia'
Thelargestofthesubpallialgroups arethestriatumandglobus pallidus.Traditionalterminol-
ogyrefers tothis pairas the'basalganglia.' Unfortunately,differentbooks usethetermbasal
gangliainavarietyofdifferentways,someaddingtheamygdalaandotherdeepforebrain
structures,andsomeevenaddingparts ofthediencephalonandmidbrainsuchas thezonain-
certaandsubstantianigra. Becauseof this,itis besteithertoavoidtheuseofthetermbasal
gangliaaltogetherortomakeitclear whenyouarereferringtothestriatumandglobus pal-
lidus alone.
Middleslicetoshowstriatum,pallidumandthalamus.
Thestriatumcontains twoparts,thecaudatenucleus andtheputamen.Onthemedialsideof
theputamenis thepallidum,representedchieflybytheglobus pallidus.Togetherthestriatum
andpallidumformapowerfulmotor controlsystem,enablingthebraintochoosefroma'li-
brary' of inheritedstereotypedbehaviors accordingtotheneedatanymoment.Thestriatum
receives asignificantinputfromthemotor cortex,and itinturnprojects totheglobus pal-
lidus.Theglobus pallidus totheventrolateralnucleus ofthethalamus andthecircuitis com-
pletedbytheprojectionofthis nucleus tothemotorcortex.Anotherimportantinputconnec-
tionof thestriatumis thedopaminergicpathwaythatarises fromthesubstantianigra.Damage
tothis dopaminergicprojectionis theunderlyingcauseofParkinson's disease.
Aless well-knownpartofthestriatumis theaccumbens nucleus,whichlies ventraltotheros-
tralparts ofthecaudateand putamen.Theaccumbens nucleus alsoreceives adopaminergic
projectionfromthebrainstem,butinthis case,itcomes fromtheventraltegmentalarea,
whichis medialtothesubstantianigra.Thedopaminergicprojectiontotheaccumbens forms
thebasis ofaninternalrewardsysteminthebrain.
51

Theamygdala
Theamygdalalies deeptothepiriform(primaryolfactory)cortexonthemedialsideofthe
temporallobe,justrostraltothehippocampus.Theamygdalais acomplexstructuremadeup
ofmanydifferentsubnuclei.Thesubnucleioftheamygdalacanbedividedintotwomain
groups –amedicalgroupthatis interconnectedwiththeolfactorysystemandalateralgroup
thatis connectedtocircuits involvedinemotionalresponses,particularlyfear.Thelateral
groupintheamygdalaresponds tosensations thatsignaldanger.Itcanreactbyactivatingau-
tonomicandendocrinecenters,suchas the'fightorflight' mechanisms.Mostofthesecircuits
arecloselyinterconnectedwiththehypothalamus.Fearandstress cangenerateverypowerful,
unconscious emotionalmemories throughtheamygdala.Theseunconscious fears arevery
difficulttosuppress orerase.
Another majorroleoftheamygdalais its controlof hierarchicalbehavior(peckingorder)in
vertebrates.Socialhierarchies arefundamentalinanimals thatbelongtolargegroups where
dominancebehaviors maintaintheeffectivestructureofthegroup.
Thereis acomplexrelationshipbetweentheamygdalaandaggressivebehavior,andthena-
tureof aggressivebehavioris oftenmisinterpreted.KonradLorenzarguedthatthestrongest
forms of aggressivebehavior arethosethatoccurbetweenmembers ofthesamespecies,usu-
allyrelatedto attempts toestablishaplaceinahierarchy(Lorenz,2002).
Adiscreditedterm–'TheLimbicSystem'
Inmanytextbooks,asectiondealingwiththeamygdalaandrelatedstructures is titled'The
LimbicSystem.'Westronglyrecommendyouavoidusingthis termbecauseitcanbedefined
inmanydifferentandconfusingways.Theterm'limbic' has its originin'legrandlobelim-
bique' ofBroca.Brocawantedtodraw attentiontothecurvedbeltoftelencephalicstructures
thatborder thecentralparts of theforebrain(thewordlimbicrefers toaborderland).This
originaldefinitionofthe'limbiclobe' includedtheventralhippocampus,theamygdala,the
cingulategyrus,andthefornix.However,inthecontemporaryliterature,thelimbiclobeis of-
tensaidtoincludeallthevarious parts ofthehippocampalformation,theseptum,theolfac-
torytubercle,andthebednucleus ofthestriaterminalis,theamygdala,andthecingulate
gyrus.Differentauthors addorsubtractstructures fromthedefinitioninwhatsometimes
seems tobearandommanner.Somegosofar as toincludethehypothalamus andparts ofthe
brainstem.Theirlogicis thatallstructures thatmightbeinvolvedinemotions orprimitivebe-
haviors shouldbelumpedtogether underthis title.Theresultis soconfusingthatwestrongly
recommendthatyouavoidusingtheterm'limbic' altogether.
Thesubcorticalwhitematter
Deeptothecerebralcortexis athicklayerof whitematter.Inconnectionalterms,theaxons in
thecerebralwhitematterareofthreetypes –associationfibers,commissuralfibers,andpro-
jectionfibers.Theassociationfibers runfromoneareaofthecortextoanotherareaofthecor-
texwithinthesamehemisphere.Theymaybeshort(joiningthecortexofadjacentgyri,for
example) ormayformlongassociationbundles runningfromonelobetoanother.Thecom-
missuralfibers joincorticalareas of onehemispheretoequivalentareas ontheoppositeside.
Theprojectionfibers traveldownwards fromthecortextothestriatum,pallidum,dien-
cephalon,midbrain,hindbrain,andspinalcord,orupwards fromthethalamus tothecortex.
Forebraincommissures
Therearefourcommissures intheforebrain,thelargestofwhichis thecorpus callosum,
whichconnects theneocorticalareas ofthetwosides.Thehippocampalcommissure(fornix
commissure)connects therightandlefthippocampalregions.Theanteriorcommissurecon-
nects areas ofthetemporallobes,includingsomeolfactoryareas.Thesmallposteriorcom-
missureis locatedinthepretectalareaof thediencephalon,adjacenttothemidbrain.
Thecorpus callosum lies underthecingulategyrus,abovetheseptum,andthelateralventri-
cle.Therostralendis calledthegenu,thecentralpartis calledthebody,andthethickened
caudalendis calledthesplenium.Theventraltipof thegenuforms therostrumofthecorpus
52

callosum.Inmostcases,fibers crossinginthecorpus callosumconnectsymmetricalparts of
thecortex.Thefibers crossinginthegenuof thecorpus callosumreachthetipofthefrontal
lobeinaU-shapedformationcalledtheforceps minor.Similarly,thefibers crossinginthe
spleniumreachthetipoftheoccipitallobeinalargerU-shapedformationcalledtheforceps
major.
Thehippocampalcommissure(alsocalledthefornixcommissure) is locatedventraltothe
corpus callosum.
Theanteriorcommissureis locatedattherostralendofthediencephaloninfrontofthean-
terior columns ofthefornix.Theanterior commissureis averyusefullandmarkinthestudy
ofsections oftheforebrain:itlies attherostralendofthediencephalonatthelevelwherethe
interventricularforamenconnects thelateralventricletothethirdventricle.Thepreopticarea
is ventraltotheanteriorcommissure,whichis themostventralpartofthesubpallium,and
caudaltothepreopticareais therostralendof thehypothalamus.Theanteriorcommissureis
alsoagoodmarkerfortherostralendofthehippocampus andtheamygdalainhumanbrain
slices.
Theposteriorcommissureis foundinthecaudalpretectalarea.Itlinks togetheranumberof
pretectalnucleiinvolvedin eyereflexes.Inthepast,theposteriorcommissurewas oftenmis-
takenlythoughttobelongtothemidbrain,butgeneexpressionproves itlies inthecaudaldi-
encephalon.
Questions forrepetition
- Of whatdoes thetelencephalonconsistof?
- Whatdoes thepalliumcomprise?
- Whatenables thehumanbraintoundergomassiveexpansion?
- Whatseparates theprimarymotorandtheprimarysensoryareas?
- Whatlayers makeuptheneocortex?
- Whichpartofthestriatumis involvedintherewardsystem?
- Inwhichfunctions is theamygdalainvolved?
- Whattypes ofwhitemattertracks canbedistinguished?
53

The Broadmann areas of the cortex
Anumberofanatomicallydistinctareas canberecognizedinthehumanneocortex.Many
modernstudies estimatethattheremaybeabout180anatomicallyandfunctionallydistinctar-
eas inthehumanneocortex.
Therehavebeenseveralattempts overthepast150years todefinethemajorhumancortical
areas.Themostinfluentialis Brodmann's.
In1910,Brodmannpublishedanumberedlistof about50differentareas basedonhistologi-
caldifferences.This numberingsystemis stillwidelyusedtoday.
ThemostrecognizedBrodmannareas arethefollowing:
- area4–primarymotorcortex(M1) -locatedintheprecentralgyrus
- areas 9and10–theprefrontalcortex–locatedrostraltotheprimarymotorcortex
- areas 3,1,and2–primarysomatosensorycortex (S1)-locatedinthepost-central
gyrus
- area41–primaryauditorycortex(A1)–locatedontheuppersurfaceofthesuperior
temporalgyrus,mainlyinsidethelateralfissure
- area17–primaryvisualcortex(V1) –locatedonthemedialsurfaceoftheoccipital
lobeintheupperandlowerbanks of thecalcarinesulcus
- areas 45and44-Broca's area(motorspeecharea)–locatedinthetriangularandoper-
cularparts oftheinferiorfrontalgyrus,immediatelyrostraltotheinferiorpartofthe
precentralgyrus inthedominanthemisphere
- areas 39and40–Wernicke's area(speechcomprehensionarea)–locatedontheupper
surfaceofthesuperiortemporalgyrus caudaltotheprimaryauditorycortexinthe
dominanthemisphere.MostofWernicke' areais insidethelateralfissure.
OverviewofimportantBroadmann areas.
54

Questions forrepetition
- How many,functionallydifferentneocorticalareas areassumednowadays?
- WhichBroadmannareas areincludedinBroca's area?
- Inwhichfunctions areBroadmannareas 39and40involved?
55

MOTOR SYSTEMS
Motor systems
Thenervous systemcanrespondtoexternalchallenges throughmusclecontraction,internal
adjustments toheartrateandbreathing,andsecretionofhormones inresponsetostress and
otherbodilyrequirements.
Controlof skeletalmuscles
Theskeletalmuscles areundervoluntarycontrolmostofthetime.However,insomecases,
thecontractionofthesemuscles is intheformofareflex,suchas whenweburnourfingers in
aflame.Reflexes arefaster thanthetypicalsystemof conscious control.
Inhumans,thecentralareafor thecontrolof theskeletalmuscles starts is theprimarymotor
areaof thecerebralcortex,whichis locatedintheprecentralgyrus ofthefrontallobe.Electri-
calstimulationofthemotorcortexproduces contractionofmuscles ontheoppositesideof
thebody.Thebodyparts arerepresentedupsidedownontheprecentralgyrus,withthehead
atthebottom,andthelower limbatthetop,withthemuscles ofthelegandfoot,represented
ontheextensionofthemotorcortexontothemedialsurfaceofthehemisphere.
Thesomatotopicpattern ofcontrolofmuscles in theprimarymotor cortex.Notethatthe
areas for controloftheleg andfootmuscles areon themedialsideofthecortex.
Themotorcortexis connectedtothemotorneurons ofthespinalcordbyalongpathway
calledthecorticospinaltract.Thecorticospinaltractarises fromlargepyramidalcells inthe
motor cortex.Theiraxons travelthroughtheinternalcapsule,cerebralpeduncle,thebasilar
pons,andthemedullarypyramidtoreachthecaudalendofthehindbrain.Atthis point,most
ofthecorticospinalfibers cross totheoppositesideinthepyramidaldecussation.Duetothat,
theymakeconnections withmotorneurons ontheoppositesideofthebodyfromtheircorti-
calorigin.
Becausethecorticospinalfiber bundles formthemedullarypyramids,thecorticospinaltract
has traditionallybeencalledthepyramidaltract.This termis insomeways unfortunatebe-
cause,bycoincidence,thecells oforiginof thecorticospinaltractarepyramid-shapedneu-
rons inthemotorcortex.Another reasontoavoidusingthetermpyramidaltractis theunfor-
56

tunateandnow discredited'pyramidal/extrapyramidal' concept,whichwas anearlybutmisin-
formedattempttoexplaintheorganizationofdifferentparts ofthemotorsystems.
Theconceptofan extrapyramidalsystembecamepopular amongneurologists inthe
early20thcentury,whoweretryingtodistinguishthemotor problems arisingfrom
damagetothepyramidal(corticospinal) tractfrom other motor syndromes.Theycon-
trastedthedirect(monosynaptic) projectionofthecortextomotoneurons (thepyrami-
dalsystem)withwhattheybelievedtobeanalternativemultisynapticpathwayfrom
cortextomotoneurons,whichtheycalledtheextrapyramidalsystem.Theyhypothe-
sizedthatthis multisynapticpathwaywentfrom cortextostriatum andpallidum,then
tovarious midbrainandhindbraincenters,andfinallytothespinalcord.Theproblem
is thatthehypothesizedchainofdescendingconnections does notexist.Itwas fa-
mouslydebunkedin1962byNautaandMehler.Theyshowedthattheglobus pallidus
projects almostentirelytothethalamus rather thantothemidbrainandthehindbrain
motor centers.Despitethis,the'extrapyramidal'conceptlives onintextbooks andin
lectures givenbyneurologists.
Thecourseofthecorticospinaltractfromthemotor cortextothespinalcord.
Damagetothecorticospinaltract
Humans whoexperienceddamagetothemotor cortex orthecorticospinaltractcannotper-
formtasks thatrequireprecisemovements of individualfingers,suchas writing,sewing,tying
knots,andpickingupsmallobjects.Less precisemovements,andthosethatinvolvelarger
musclegroups,areless severelyaffected.Whenacerebralstrokedamages thecorticospinal
57

tractinhumans,othernearbyareas,suchas thestriatum,arealsodamaged.Becauseofthis,
theloss offinemovementis accompaniedbyhypertonia(stiffness orspasticity)andhyper-
reflexiarelatedtostriataldamage.
Theroleofnon-corticalmotorcenters –modules formotorcontrol
Weplanmovements conceptually,thinkinginsequences andoutcomes ratherthanjointan-
gles andcontractionofindividualmuscles.Thebraintranslates high-levelactionplans into
modular systems tomanagethecontrolof dozens of muscles neededtocarryoutaparticular
tasktomakethis process moreefficient.Thesemodularcontrolsystems arefoundinthebrain
stemandspinalcord.Thesemodules arepre-wiredduringbraindevelopmenttoproduce
semi-automaticmovements likewalkingandchewing.This makes iteasierforthemotorcor-
textogetaresultwithouttheneedtoconnecttoindividualmotorneurons.Duringvertebrate
evolution,complexbehaviors andmovementsets becameorganizedinahierarchyofmod-
ules.Atthetopofthehierarchyaresurvivalbehaviors -eatinganddrinkingbehaviors,defen-
sivebehaviors,reproductivebehaviors,andmovementpatterns toexploretheimmediateenvi-
ronment.Themostimportantcenters for thecontrolofsurvivalbehaviors arelocatedinthe
hypothalamus.
Brainstemandspinalcordmodules for controlofcomplexmovements
Eachhypothalamicbehavioralorganizer connects withmovementmodules inthebrainstem
andspinalcord.Forexample,feedingmayinvolveturningtheheadtolookaround,running
toafoodsource,reachingandgrasping,andlickingandchewing.Eachoftheseactivities is
sequencedbyaparticularpartofthemidbrain,hindbrain,orspinalcord.Thehypothalamus
activates anumberofthesemovementmodules inacoordinatedprogramtoachievethede-
siredbehavior.Thebrainstemoffers modules for orientingmovements oftheheadandneck,
licking,chewing,facialexpression,vocalization,and controlofbreathing.Themovement
modules inthespinalcordincludethosethatcontrolposture,locomotion,reaching,and
grasping.
Anexampleofmodularcontrolatthespinalcordlevelis thewithdrawalofthelowerlimb
fromasharppaininthefoot,suchas standingonapieceofbrokenglass.Interneurongroups
ofthespinalcordentirelyhandlethis complexresponse,andthewithdrawalmovementoc-
curs beforethepainis evenregisteredinthecerebralcortex.Theprimaryresponseis topull
thefootawayfromthesourceof thepain,requiringcontractionofhipflexors (psoas andilia-
cus) andkneeflexors (hamstrings)whileinhibitingthecorrespondingextensors topermitthe
movement.Theproblemwiththis responseis thatitwillalsocauseafallunless adjustments
aremade.Themoduletakes careof this bycontractinghipextensors,hipabductors,andknee
extensors oftheoppositelegtostabilizethebody.Inthis way,tenormoremuscles ineachleg
areeither contractedormadetorelaxinorder toachievethewholepatternofmovement
neededtoterminateapainfulstimulus.
58

Reflexactions followinga painfulinjurytotherightfoot.On theright-handside,theflexor
muscles pullthefootawayfromthepainfulstimulus,andtheextensors areinhibited.On
theleftside,theextensor muscles areactivatedtomaintain stability.
Descendingmotorcontrolpathways other thanthecorticospinaltract
As wellas sendingfibers tothespinalcordinthecorticospinaltract,themotorcortexsends
axons tothebasilarpons (corticopontinefibers)andthebrainstem(corticobulbarfibers)in
ordertoconnectwiththecerebellumandbrainstemmotorcenters.Severalcenters inthe
brainstemgiverisetodescendingtracts thatendintheinterneuronpools oftheintermediate
spinalgraymatter.Thesearetherubrospinal,tectospinal,reticulospinal,andvestibulospinal
tracts,eachcontrollingdifferentaspects ofmovement.
Theroles ofthestriatumandpalliduminmotor control
Thestriatumandthepallidumarelargemasses of graymatterthatliedeeptothecerebralcor-
tex.Thestriatumconsists ofthreeparts –thecaudatenucleus,theputamen,andtheaccum-
bens nucleus.Medialtotheputameninthemainpartofthepallidum,calledtheglobus pal-
lidus.Theglobus pallidus is separatedfromthethalamus bytheinternalcapsule.
Theaccumbens nucleus lies deeptotherostralparts ofthecaudatenucleus andputamen.
Thestriatalandpallidalcenters havealongevolutionaryhistoryandcanbeclearlyidentified
inreptiles andbirds.Thestriatumandpallidumarepartofamajorforebraincircuitofcon-
nections,regulatingtheformandstyleof movements.
This circuitbegins withneurons inthemotor cortex,projectingtocells inthestriatum.Stri-
atalneurons projecttothepallidum.Thepallidumprojects tothemidbrainandthethalamus.
Thethalamicnucleus involvedthenprojects backtothecerebralcortex,alteringmovements
intheplanningstageorwhiletheyareinprogress.Thesubstantianigrais intimatelycon-
nectedwiththestriatumthroughthedopaminergicnigrostriatalpathway.
59

Arostralcoronalsliceshowingthecaudate(Cd),putamen (Pu),andaccumbens (Acb).
Acoronalslicethrough themiddleofthecerebrumshowingthecaudatenucleus (Cd),
putamen (Pu),andglobus pallidus (GP)andtheir relationshiptotheinternalcapsule(ic)
andthalamus (Th).
60

Theconnection circuitstartingfromexcitatoryglutamateneurons in theprimarymotor
cortex(GLU).ThecorticalGLU neurons projecttoGABAneurons in thestriatum.The
GABAstriatalneurons in turn projecttoGABAneurons in thepallidum.Thecircuitis
completedbytheprojection of thepallidalneurons tothethalamus andthethalamicGABA
projection backtothecortex.
This setofconnections underlies theproductionofpredeterminedmovementpatterns.Many
species areknowntohavecomplexpatterns of movementassociatedwithmatingandordis-
plays ofaggression.Itseems possiblethatthestriatal/pallidalcomplexis themaincenterfor
theinitiationofthesegeneticallydeterminedmovementpatterns.
Aninterestingfeatureofthecells of thestriatumandpallidumis thattheyinfluencethecortex
byinhibitingthalamicneurons usingtheinhibitoryneurotransmitterGABA.This makes them
verydifferentfromthecorticalneurons thatconnecttothestriatum;thesecorticalneurons re-
leasetheexcitatorytransmitter substanceglutamate.
Wedonothaveaclearideaofthepreciseroleof thestriatumandpalliduminhumans,butwe
dohaveclues fromcases inwhichtheseareas aredamaged.Thefindings aredisorders ofthe
restingtoneofmuscles,difficultystartingmovements,andunwantedinvoluntarymovements.
InParkinson's disease,theinputtothestriatumfromthesubstantianigrais damaged.There-
sultis amassiveanddisablingincreaseinmuscletone,accompaniedbytremorinthehands,
andgreatdifficultyinstartingmovements.Asevereformofdamagetothestriatumis seenin
late-stageHuntington's disease,wheretheface,trunk,andlimbs writhecontinuously.Inthe
caseofcerebralpalsy,thestriatumandpallidumarelikelydamagedinthebabybeforebirth.
61

Theresultis majordisorders of muscletone(oftencalledspasticity)andavarietyofinvolun-
tarymovements.
Thefinalcommonpathwayforallmotor systems –themotorneuron
Allmotorcontrolsystems actthroughthemotorneurons:thefinalpathwaytomuscles.Large
(alpha)motorneurons intheventralhornofthespinalcordactivatetheskeletalmuscles of
thelimbs andtrunk.Similar alphamotor neurons inthemidbrainandhindbrainactivatethe
voluntarymuscles ofthehead.Eachalphamotor neuronis connectedtomanyfibers ina
skeletalmuscle.Whenthealphamotor neuronfires,allofthefibers towhichitis connected
willcontract.Themotorunitis thecombinationof asinglealphamotorneuronandthemus-
clefibers towhichitconnects.Activatingalphamotor neurons is theonlywaytocauseskele-
talmusclefibers tocontract.As aresult,allthemotor controlsystems describedabove
achievetheireffects bystimulatingorsuppressingalphamotorneurons.TheEnglishphysiol-
ogistandNobelprizewinner,Charles Sherrington,coinedtheterm' finalcommonpathway' to
describetheroleofalphamotorneurons.
Questions forrepetition
- Of whatparts does thestriatumconsistof?
- Describethecourseofthecorticospinaltract.
- Whathappens whenthecorticospinaltractis damaged?
- How is theglobus pallidus separatedfromthethalamus?
- How is thesubstantianigraconnectedtothestriatum?
62

SENSORY SYSTEM
The somatosory system
Somaticsensations comefromtheskin,muscles,joints,andbones.Somaticsensations from
theheadtraveltothebrain steminthetrigeminalnerve,whereas thosebelow theheadtravel
inspinalnerves tothespinalcord.Somaticsensations fromtheskinaretouch,deeppressure,
pain,andtemperature.
Somatosensory pathways in the spinal cord
Boththespinothalamictracts andthedorsalcolumns (gracileandcuneatefasciculi)convey
somatosensoryinformationfromonesideof thebodytothecerebralcortexoftheopposite
sideviathethalamus.Eachofthesesystems is basicallyachainofthreeneurons:thefirst
neuronis adorsalrootganglioncellwithits centralprocess enteringthespinalcordtoascend
forsomedistancebeforeitsynapses withthesecondneuroninthechain;theaxonofthesec-
ondneuroncrosses themidlineimmediatelyandascends tothethalamus;thethirdneuron
sends its axonfromthethalamus tothecerebralcortex.
Thepainandtemperature-sensitivefibers (spinothalamictract)cross themidlineafew seg-
ments abovethelevelatwhichtheyenter thespinalcord.Incontrast,finetouchandproprio-
ceptionfibers (dorsalcolumn-mediallemniscus pathway)donotcross untiltheyreachthe
hindbrain.
Thespinalsomatosensorypathways.Touch anddeep pressuresensations arecarriedin the
dorsalcolumn-medicallemniscus system.Pain andtemperaturesensations arecarriedin
thespinothalamicsystem.
Thedorsalcolumntracts carrytouch,deeppressure,proprioceptive,andvibrationsenseinfor-
mationinthegracileandcuneatefasciculi-thegracilefasciculus mainlyconveys information
fromthehindlimb.Thecuneatefasciculus conveys informationfromtheforelimb.
63

Dorsal column-medial lemniscus pathway
This is themaintouchpathway.Ittransmits signals fromlow-thresholdmechanoreceptors in
theskin,muscles,andjoints.This enables tactilediscrimination,vibrationdetection,and
proprioception(senseofpositionfromjointandmusclereceptors).
Themaintouchpathway's first-order(primary) neurons arelocatedinthedorsalrootganglia.
Theaxons oftheganglion cells carryinginformationfromthelowerlimbs formthegracile
fasciculus,whileintheupperextremities,theyformthecuneatefasciculus.Thetwofasciculi
arecollectivelyknownas thedorsalcolumns.
Thedorsalcolumnaxons ascendtothehindbrain,wheretheyterminateinthegracileand
cuneatenuclei.Theaxons leavingthecells of thegracileandcuneatenucleicross themidline
andformacompactbundlecalledthemediallemniscus.Themediallemniscus ascends
throughthebrainstemtosynapsewiththird-order neurons intheventroposteriornucleus of
thethalamus.Thethalamicneurons sendtheiraxons totheprimarysomatosensorycortexin
thepostcentralgyrus.
Spinothalamic tracts
Therearetwospinothalamictracts,lateralandventral.Informationaboutpain
andtemperatureis conveyedbythelateralspinothalamictract,whiletheventral
spinothalamictractconveys touchsensation.Thefirst-orderneurons ofthespinothalamicsys-
temarelocatedinthespinalganglia.Theaxons oftheseganglioncells enterthespinalcord
andascendforafew segments beforetheysynapsewithsecond-orderneurons inthesubstan-
tiagelatinosaofthedorsalhorn.Theaxons of thesecond-orderneurons cross themidlinein
theanteriorwhitecommissureofthespinalcordtoformthespinothalamictracts.Thecrossed
painandtemperatureneurons formthelateralspinothalamictractinthelateralcolumnofthe
spinalcord.Incontrast,thecrossedtouchneurons formtheventralspinothalamictractinthe
ventralcolumnofthespinalcord.
Thespinothalamictracts ascendalongthespinallengthandthentravelthroughthebrainstem
untiltheyreachthethalamus.Inthethalamus,theysynapsewiththird-orderneurons inthe
ventroposteriornucleus.Theaxons of theventroposteriorthalamicneurons traveltothesoma-
tosensorycortex.
The cranial somatosensory system
Almostallcranialsomatosensoryfibers intheheadtravelinthetrigeminalnerve.Thefirst-
ordertrigeminalsensoryneurons arelocatedinthetrigeminalganglionintheskullbase.The
trigeminalganglionaxons enter thehindbrainthroughthesideofthebasilarpons.Someof
thesefibers synapseintheprincipaltrigeminalsensorynucleus,whichlies atthelevelof
entryof thetrigeminalnerve.However,manyof thefibers descendinthehindbrainforcon-
siderabledistances beforetheymakecontactwithsecond-orderneurons.Someofthedes-
cendingfibers travelas faras upper cervicalsegments beforetheysynapse.
Thedescendingtrigeminalfibers formthespinaltrigeminaltract,andthetrigeminalnuclear
groups caudaltotheprincipalnucleus arecalledthenucleus ofthespinaltrigeminaltract.
Trigeminalfibers carrying touchsensationsynapseintheprincipalsensorynucleus andthe
rostralpartofthespinaltrigeminalnucleus.Whereas thosecarryingpainandtemperaturesen-
sationsynapseinthecaudalpartofthespinaltrigeminalnucleus.
Theaxons oftheneurons oftheprincipalsensorynucleus andthespinaltrigeminalnucleus
cross themidlineandascendtothemedialpartoftheventroposteriornucleus thalamus.The
ventroposteriornucleus sends its axons totheinferiorhalfofthepostcentralgyrus.
The primary somatosensory cortex
Theprimarysomatosensorycortexis locatedinthepostcentralgyrus,inBrodmannareas 3,1,
and2.Thesomatosensoryinformationreachingthepostcentralgyrus is topicallyorganized.
Eachindividualregionofthebodyis representedinaseparateareaonthegyrus,withthe
headatthebottomandthelower limbatthetop.
64

Theprimarysomatosensorycortex(S1),which lies in thepostcentralgyrus.
Thesomatotopicallyorganizedrepresentation ofbodysensations on thepostcentralgyrus.
Questions for repetition
- What information is summarised as the somatosensory system?
- How many neurons make up most somatosensory pathways?
- Where do the fibers that transmit information about temperature cross?
- How is touch sensation transmitted from the face?
- Which Broadmann areas does the primary somatosensory cortex com-
prise?
65

The visual system
Theeyecollects visualinformationtosendtothebrain.Beforereachingtheretina,light
passes throughthecornea, aqueous humor,lens,andvitreous humor.Visualimages arefo-
cusedbythecorneaandlens beforetheyreachtheretina.Theretinais enclosedinathick
fibrous layercalledthesclera.
Adiagramoftheeye.
Thelightreceptorcells oftheretina,therods andcones,lieinthedeepestlayeroftheretina,
solightmustpass throughthesurfacelayers of theretinabeforeitreaches thereceptors.
Thehumanretinais intheformofadeepcup.Its outlinerepresents aboutthree-quarters ofa
spherewithadiameterof22mm.Thehumanretinacontains about7millionconecells and
about700millionrodcells.Theconecells areconcentratedinacentralareacalledthemac-
ula.Theyareresponsibleforhighacuityandcolor vision.Thereareveryfew rodcells inthe
macula.Cones aresensitivetobrightlightandfallintothreecategories thatrespondtolight
inthespectrum's red,green,orblueparts.Therodcells donotdiscriminatebetweencolors.
Instead,they aresensitivetodimlightandreactquicklytomovingobjects enteringthevisual
field.
Justmedialtothemaculais anareawheretheaxons leavetheretinaformingtheopticnerve.
Therearenophotoreceptors inthis area,soitcreates ablindspotontheretina,about1.5-2.0
mmindiameter.
The retinal cell layers
Thecells oftheretinaarearrangedindistinctlayers,themostprominentofwhicharethe
photoreceptorlayer,thebipolar layer,andtheganglioncelllayer.As notedabove,the
photoreceptorlayeris thedeepestlayer oftheretina–furthestfromtheentrypathoflightrays.
Thereceptorcells inthis layer aretherods andcones.Thelight-sensitiveprocesses ofthe
rods arepartlyembeddedinthepigmentedepitheliallayer.Superficialtothephotoreceptor
layer is thebipolarlayer.Thebipolar cells receiveinformationfromphotoreceptors andsend
signals toganglioncells.Amacrinecells andhorizontalcells arealsolocatedinthebipolar
layer.Thefunctionoftheamacrineandhorizontalcells is tomodulatethesignals reachingthe
bipolarcells.Theganglion celllayer lies onthesuperficialsurfaceoftheretina.Ganglion
cells arethelargestcells in theretinabecausetheyhavelongaxons thattraveltothebrainin
theopticnerve.Theganglioncellaxons intheopticnervereachcenters inthehypothalamus
(thesuprachiasmaticnucleus),thalamus (thelateralgeniculatenucleus),andthesuperiorcol-
liculus of themidbrain.
66

Thelayers oftheretina.On theleftis aphotomicrograph ofasection through theretina
with theganglion celllayer aboveandthephotoreceptor layer below.Adiagramshowing
theconnections between photoreceptors,bipolar cells,andganglion cells is on theright.
Theintrinsicnetworks oftheretinaarecapableofsignificantsignalprocessingandconsolida-
tionof information.Forexample,ganglioncells ontheedges oftheretinareceiveinformation
fromahundredormorerodcells,thus increasingsensitivitytodimlight.Bycontrast,gan-
glioncells inthemaculaofahumanretinareceiveinputfromonlytwoorthreecones,en-
ablingtheretinatoresolvefinedetail.
The organization of the projection from the retina to the brain
Theganglioncellaxons fromeachofthetwohalves oftheretinaprojecttodifferentsides of
thebrain.Theaxons fromthemedial(nasal) half cross themidlinetoprojecttotheopposite
sideofthebrain,whereas theaxons fromthelateral(temporal)halfprojecttothesamesideof
thebrain.
Becauselightreaches theretinathroughabiconvexlens,theimagereachingtheretinais re-
versed.This means thatthelightreceivedfromthetemporalhalfofthevisualfieldfalls upon
thenasalparts ofeachretinaandviceversa.Theimagefromeachtemporalvisualfield(nasal
retina)crosses inthechiasmtocontinuetoreachthethalamus andcortexontheoppositeside
ofthebrain.Theimagefromeachnasalvisualfield(temporalretina)remains uncrossedand
continues toreachthethalamus andcortexof thesamesideas theretina.Theoutcomeis that
theleft-handsides ofthevisualfields of botheyes runintherightoptictract,andtheright-
handsides ofthevisualfields of botheyes runtogetherintheleftoptictract.Theoverallres-
ultis thateachvisualcortexreceives informationfromtheoppositeside's visualfields.In
otherwords,therightsideof theretinaof botheyes (temporalretinaoftherighteyeandnasal
retinaof thelefteye)projects totherightvisualcortex,andviceversa.
67

Adiagramshowingtherepresentation of thevisualfields on theretina,thelateralgenicu-
late,andthevisualcortex.Theoveralleffectis thattherighthalfofthevisualfieldis rep-
resentedin thevisualcortexandviceversa.
Questions for repetition
- Describethepathoflightthroughtheeye.
- Whatis thecharacteristicstimulus for arod?
- Whatcauses theblindspot?
- Of whatlayers does theretinaconsistof?
- Whatis theanatomicalstructureofthevisualpathway?
68

The auditory system
Theearcollects soundinformationtosendtothebrainviathevestibulocochlearnerve.
Theearconsists ofthreeparts:theexternalearconsistingofthepinna,theauditorycanal,and
thetympanicmembrane(eardrum);themiddleear,whichcontains thethreeauditoryossicles;
theinnerear, whichcontains thecochlea.
Soundenters theexternalear through theauditorycanalandcauses thetympanicmem-
branetovibrate.This vibration is transmittedacross themiddleear bythreetinybones,the
malleus,incus,andstapes.Thestapes transmits thevibration tofluidin theinternalear,
andthesevibrations eventuallyreach thecochlea.Thecochleais abonyshellthatcontains
thesoundreceptors.Notethatthemiddleear is connectedtothebackofthethroatbyan
air-filledcanalcalledtheEustachian tube,or pharyngotympanictube.
Thethreeauditoryossicles arenamedthemalleus,incus,andstapes.Theyformasetoflevers
thatmechanicallytransmits soundfromthetympanicmembranetotheovalwindow ofthein-
ner ear.Soundwaves reach theinnerear thenreachreceptorhaircells inthecochlea.The
cochleais abonycaseshapedlikeaspiralseashell.Itcontains theauditoryreceptorcells,
whichconvertsoundinformationintonerveimpulses.
Insidethecochleararethreespiraltubes,thescalavestibuli,thescalamedia,andthescala
tympani.Eachofthesethreetubes is filledwithfluid.Thescalamediacontains theauditory
receptor apparatus (theorganof Corti),whichsits onthebasilarmembrane.Theouterhair
cells oftheorganofCortiarethereceptor cells thatareconnectedtosensoryaxons.
Theorganof Cortiis tonotopicallyorganized.Thehaircells respondtodifferentsoundfre-
quencies accordingtotheirpositioninthecochlea.Thehaircells atthebaseofthecochleare-
spondtohighfrequencies,andthehair cells attheapexofthecochlearespondtolow fre-
quencies.
69

Insidethecochleaareneuronalreceptors groupedin astructurecalledtheorgan ofCorti.
Thecochleacontains threefluid-filledtubes,anditis themiddleoneofthese,thescalame-
dia,which houses theorgan ofCorti.Hair cells in theorgan ofCortidetectsoundvibra-
tions,andtheinformation is transmittedtothehindbrain bytheauditory(cochlear)nerve.
Thecellbodies ofthecochlear nervefibers arelocatedin thespiralganglion,which is em-
beddedin thebonystructureof thecochlea.
Thecellbodies oftheauditoryreceptor neurons,whichareconnectedtotheorganofCorti,
arelocatedinthespiralganglion,whichis inthecenterofthecochlea.Eachspiralganglion
cellhas anincomingaxonprocess connectedtotheorganofCortiandanoutgoingaxonpro-
cess thattravels intheauditorynervetothebrainstem.
Theauditorynerveaxons terminateinthecochlear nucleiinthehindbrain.Thecochlearnuc-
leiprojecttothesuperiorolivarycomplex.Fromthere,theauditoryinformationis senttothe
inferiorcolliculus ofthemidbrain,whereitis further processedbeforebeingsenttotheme-
dialgeniculatenucleus inthethalamus.Themedialgeniculateprojects totheprimaryaudit-
orycortex(A1)ontheuppersurfaceofthesuperiortemporalgyrus.Theauditorypathway
faithfullymaintains thefrequencymapfromthecochleatothecortexsothattheauditoryrep-
resentationthatreaches theprimaryauditorycortexis stilltonotopicallyorganized.
Thebrainstemauditorycenters of bothsides areinterconnectedacross themidline.This bilat-
eralnetworkallows thebraintoworkoutthepositionofanincomingsound.Becauseofthese
interconnections betweenthebrainstemauditorynuclei,theprimaryauditorycortexreceives
informationfrombothears.
70

Theauditorypathwayfromthecochleatotheprimaryauditorycortex(A1).
Ganglion cells in thespiralganglion receiveinformation fromtheorgan ofCorti,andthis
information is transmittedcentrallytothecochlear nuclei.Each cochlear nucleus is con-
nectedtoneurons in thesuperior olivarynucleiofboth sides.Thesuperior olivarynuclei
sendaxons totheinferior colliculus ofthemidbrain,which is in turn connectedtotheme-
dialgeniculatenucleus ofthethalamus.Thegeniculatemedicalprojects totheprimary
auditorycortex
Questions for repetition
- How is theinnerearstructured?
- Inwhichanatomicalstructurearethesensoryreceptors forthe"soundwaves" embedded?
- Whatis theanatomicalstructureoftheauditorypathway?
- Whichthalamicnucleus is involvedintheauditorypathway?
71

The vestibular system
Thename'vestibular' comes fromthevestibule,which is asmallbonyspaceintheinnerear
inwhichthevestibularreceptors arelocated.Thevestibuleis nexttothecochlea,andthetwo
structures togetherarehousedinthebonylabyrinthof theinnerear.
Themainfunctions ofthevestibular systemaretomaintainbalanceandcoordinateeye
movementwiththeheadandbodyposition.Thesefunctions aremanagedatareflexlevel,
with
constantadjustments beingmadetoposturalmuscles andeyemovement.Inputfromthe
vestibularsystemenables theeyes totrackanobjectofinterest,evenwhenthebodymoves
unpredictably.Eyemovementcoordinationuses anetworkthatinterconnects thevestibular
systemwiththevisualsystem,thecerebellum,thespinalcord,andthemotorneurons that
controltheeyemuscles.
As wellas controllingthis complexreflexnetwork,thevestibularsystemsupplies information
tothecerebralcortexaboutthebody's positioninspace.This helps togiveus aconscious ap-
preciationofthepositionof thebodyinspace.Thesomatosensorysystemalsoprovides vital
informationonbodypositionthatcontributes toourabilitytomaintainpostureandbalance.
Someofthepositionsenseinformationfromthesomatosensorysystemcomes fromtouchre-
ceptors intheskinanddeeppressurereceptors inthefeet.
The semicircular canals
Thevestibulecontains twoquiteseparatesystems for gatheringinformationonheadposition.
Onesystem,basedonthesemicircularcanals,detects movementoftheheadinanydirection.
Incontrast,theothersystem,basedonthesacculeandutriclesystem,is designedtoregister
thepositionoftheheadwhenitis notmoving.Therefore,thesemicircularcanalsystemcan
bedescribedas thedynamicvestibularsystem,andthesaccule/utriclesystemcanbede-
scribedas thestaticvestibular system.
Overviewofthevestibular system.
72

Semicircular canals
Thesemicircularcanals arethreealmostcircular tubes containingafluidcalledendolymph.
Endolymphis alsofoundin thecochlearductincontactwithauditoryhaircells.Eachsemi-
circularcanalis placedinadifferentspatialplane–onehorizontal,oneverticalclosetothe
sagittalplane,andoneverticalclosetothecoronalplane.Nomatterwhatdirectionthehead
moves in,itwillcausefluidtomovearoundinoneor moreofthethreecanals.Eachcanalhas
awidenedareacalledtheampulla,whichcontains sensitivehaircells.Theprocesses ofthe
haircells areembeddedin apieceof jellycalledthecupula.Whenthefluidmoves inresponse
toheadmotion,thecupulais draggedinthedirectionoffluidmovement,twistingthepro-
cesses ofthehaircells.Thetwistinggenerates anelectricalsignal,whichis carriedtothe
hindbrainbythevestibularnerve.
Thehair cells ofeach semicircular canalarelocatedin theampulla.Theciliaofthehair
cells detectthemovementoftheendolymph.Theinformation gatheredbythehair cells is
gatheredbytheaxons ofthevestibular ganglion cells.Thevestibular ganglion cells areun-
usualin thattheyaretruebipolar ganglion cells,notpseudounipolar cells as in theso-
matosensoryandauditorysystems.Thecentralaxon ofthevestibular ganglion cellcon-
nects with thevestibular nucleiin thehindbrain.
73

Schematicoverviewofthevestibular pathways.
Saccule and utricle
Thesaccule-utriclesystemis containedinapair ofrecesses inthevestibule.Thesacculeand
utricleeachhaveapatchofhair cells calledamacula.Theprocesses ofthesehaircells are
embeddedinaplateofjelly,as arethoseof thesemicircularcanals,butinthis case,thejelly
contains calciumcarbonatecrystals calledotoliths.Thecalcium-containingjellyplateis
calledtheotolithmembrane.Whentheheadis stationary,theweightofthecalcium-filledoto-
liths pulls thehaircells undertheinfluenceof gravity,andthis,inturn,causes thehaircells to
bestimulated.Otherexternalforces suchas rapidaccelerationcanalsostimulatethehaircells
inthemacula.Thereceptorclusters of thesacculeand utriclearesetatrightangles toeach
othersothattheycanestablishthehead's positionatalltimes.Themaculaofthesacculeis set
intheverticalplane,soitis bestplacedtodetectflexionandextensionmovements ofthe
head.Themaculaoftheutricleis setinthehorizontalplane,soitis bestplacedtodetectlat-
eraltiltingofthehead.Theinformationgatheredbythereceptors ofthesacculeandutricleis
carriedtothehindbrainbythevestibular nerve.
74

Vestibular nuclei
Thevestibularnucleiofthehindbrainoccupyalargeareainthefloorofthefourthventricle.
Theyarestronglyconnectedwiththecerebellum,thespinalcord,andwiththesystemthat
controls eyemovement.Thevestibularconnectiontotheneckandeyemuscles ensures that
headandeyepositions areconstantlylinkedtogether.Themediallongitudinalfasciculus is
thebrainstempathwaylinkingtheeyemusclenucleiandthevestibularnuclei.Thecloserela-
tionshipbetweenthevestibular receptors andeyemovementcanbedemonstratedbyspinning
someonearound.Ifyousitsomeoneinarotatingofficechairandspinthemaroundtentimes
atamoderatespeed,thenstopthemabruptly,youwillseetheeyes flickfromsidetosideina
movementcallednystagmus.Theeyemovementhappens becausethefluidinthehorizontal
semicircularcanalis stillmovingwhenthechair stops moving,andtheeyemusclecontrol
systemthinks thattheheadis stillmoving.Itthereforeresponds withtheside-to-sidemove-
mentoftheeyes.Thesubjectwillalsocomplainthattheroomseems tobespinningaround
them;this sensationis calledvertigo.
Itis crucialtodistinguishthesensationof vertigofromdizziness.Dizziness is afeelingofun-
steadiness,whileinvertigo,theworldseems tobemovingaroundyou.Vertigois oftenac-
companiedbyfeelings ofnauseaandmaybeassociatedwithvomitinginseverecases.
Vestibulospinal tracts
Twoimportantdescendingtracts arisefromthevestibularnuclei–theuncrossedlateral
vestibulospinaltract,which reaches allspinalcordlevels,andthecrossedmedialvestibu-
lospinaltract,whichends inthecervicalspinalcord.Themedial
vestibulospinaltractis primarilyresponsivetoinputfromthesemicircularcanals,anditcon-
nects withtheneckmuscles tocontrolheadposition.Thelateralvestibulospinaltractis
mainlyresponsivetoinformationfromthesacculeandutricle;its primaryroleis toadjust
postureinthelimbs andtrunkbyactivatingextensormuscles tomaintainbalance.
Vestibular representation in the cerebral cortex
Whilethemainfunctionofthevestibularsystemis theautomaticcontrolof
bodyandeyeposition,thecerebralcortexreceives vestibularinformation
,whichcontributes toaconscious perceptionof bodyposition.Themain
areareceivingvestibularinformationinmonkeys is locatedbetweentheventral
partoftheprimarysomatosensorycortexandtheinsula.Itis assumedthat
anequivalentareaexists inhumans.Becausetheprimarysomatosensory
cortexis inthepostcentralgyrus of theparietallobe,this areais referredtoas
theparietal-insularvestibular cortex.Theinputtothis areais notexclusivelyvestibular;it
alsoreceives informationfromthevisualsystemandfromposition-sensereceptors inthe
neck.
Questions for repetition
- Whatarethetwosystems for determiningheadposition?
- Whatarethedifferences betweenthesetwosystems?
- Whichbrainstempathwayconnects thecontroloftheeyemuscles andthevestibularnu-
clei?
- Whatis theprimaryfunctionof thelateralvestibulospinaltract?
75

Olfaction
Inmostmammals,thesenseof smell(olfaction) plays acriticalroleinrecognizingpredators,
partners,andoffspring.Theolfactorysystemhas becomeless importantinhumans because
werelyonahighlydevelopedvisualsystem.However,itis notoftenrealizedthatagreatdeal
ofwhatwecalltasteis actuallybasedonolfactorysignals.Whenwehaveanasalinfection,
andtheolfactoryreceptors areinjuredorblocked,weloseabout90%ofourabilitytoappre-
ciateflavors.Inmanyanimals,olfactoryinputtotheamygdalacaninitiateemotionalre-
sponses,includingaggression.
Theolfactoryepitheliumofthenasalcavityconverts informationonodors intocodedneural
signals.Olfactoryreceptorneurons intheroof ofthenosearesubjecttocontinualdamage,
andinrodents,theyhaveanaveragelifespanof only40days.Becauseof
this,theyhavetobeconstantlyreplenishedfromstemcells.Eacholfactoryreceptorneuron
sends anunmyelinatedaxonthroughholes intheethmoidboneintheroofofthenoseto
reachtheolfactorybulb.
Themain olfactoryprojection is diagrammaticallyshown on theleftofthepicture.Fibers
fromtheolfactorybulbtravelin theolfactorytracttoreach theprimaryolfactorycortex
(piriformcortex),theentorhinalcortex,andpartof theamygdala.Therightsideofthedia-
gramshows theaccessoryolfactorypathway,which does notexistin humans butis an im-
portantstructurein manymammals.
Inadditiontothemainolfactorysystem,manymammals (butnothumans)haveasecondol-
factorysystemconcernedwithdetectingpheromones.Pheromones aresignalingchemicals re-
leasedintotheenvironmenttocausebehavioralchanges innearbyindividuals.Insects use
pheromones tosignalawiderangeofsituations,includingsexualreadiness,alarm,andto
markatrail.Mostmammals haveasmallpheromonedetectingsystemcalledtheaccessory
olfactorysystem.Itis primarilyrelatedtosexualsignaling.This systemis notpresentinhu-
mans.
Thepheromone-sensitiveareainthenoseis calledthevomeronasalorgan.Removalofthe
vomeronasalorganinjuvenilemalemicedoes notimpairfood-findingabilities butdoes
76

impair theirabilitytorecognizesexualsignals frompotentialmates.Axons ofreceptorneur-
ons inthevomeronasalorganprojectexclusivelytotheaccessoryolfactorybulb(AOB)adja-
centtothemainolfactorybulb.Theoutputoftheaccessoryolfactorybulbis toaspecialnuc-
leus superficialtotheamygdala,calledthebednucleus oftheaccessoryolfactorytract.
Projections from the olfactory receptors to the brain
Nervefibers connectedtotheolfactoryreceptor cells intheroofofthenoseformtwelveto
twentyolfactorynervebundles.Thesenervebundles travelthroughaseries ofbonycanals in
theethmoidbonetoreachtheolfactorybulbontheventralsideofthefrontallobe.Because
theolfactorysystemis anextensionoftheforebrainandnotatypicalnerve,itis surrounded
bymeninges andcerebrospinalfluid.Fractures of thebonyroofofthenosecanthereforeres-
ultinmeningealtears andcerebrospinalfluidleakage.Thefluidleaks outthroughthenose,
andthemeningealtearcan resultinpotentiallyfatalbacterialinfectioninthecerebrospinal
fluidspacearoundthebrain.
Fibers of theolfactorybulbcontinuetoformtheolfactorytract,whichlies inagrooveonthe
ventralsurfaceofthefrontallobe.Theolfactorytractends bydividingintoamedialandalat-
eralbranch.Thelargerlateralbranch(calledthelateralolfactorytract)ends mainlyinthe
primaryolfactorycortex.Theprimaryolfactorycortexis traditionallycalledthepiriformcor-
tex.Inhumans,theprimaryolfactorycortexis locatedinagyrus calledtheuncus.Theuncus
is themostrostralpartoftheparahippocampalgyrus ofthemedialsideofthetemporallobe.
Theuncus sits onthemedialsurfaceoftheamygdalaandis rostraltothehippocampus.
Someolfactorytractfibers cross intheanterior commissurepathwaytoconnectoneolfactory
bulbtothatoftheoppositeside.
Thebloodsupplytotheuncus canbecutoff duringadifficultbirthwhenpressureonthehead
duringlaborpushes thetemporallobeagainsttheduralroofofthecerebellum.This candam-
agetheunderlyingamygdalaandmayresultinanatypicalformofepilepsylaterinlife,called
temporallobeepilepsyoruncinateepilepsy.
Theolfactoryventricleis asmallspacefilledwithcerebrospinalfluidinthemiddleoftheol-
factorybulb.Itis formedfromanextensionof thelateralventricle.Inrodents,anareadirectly
under thelateralventricle,thesubventricular zone,produces stemcells thatmigrateforward
fromthelateralventricleintotheolfactorybulb.Theyprovideacontinualsourceofnew
neurons fortheolfactorysystemthroughoutadultlife.This cellgroupis calledtherostralmi-
gratorystream.Therostralmigratorystreamandthehippocampus aretheonlyplaces where
postnatalneurogenesis occurs inthebrain.Arostralmigratorystreamhas beenshowninthe
postnatalhumanbrain,butitis relativelysmallandbecomes evensmalleras thebrainma-
tures.
77

Theolfactory(piriform)cortexis in agyrus calledtheuncus.Itlies attherostraltipofthe
parahippocampalgyrus ofthetemporallobe.Theolfactorycortexis superficialtotheamy-
gdalaandis rostraltothehippocampus.Theworduncus means ahook,which describes
theshapeofthis smallgyrus.
Questions for repetition
- Which sense is extremely closely related to the sense of smell?
- How can mammals also perceive pheromones?
- Is the olfactory nerve built like a peripheral nerve?
- What is the primary olfactory cortex in humans called?
- Are the receptor neurons of the sense of smell a stable tissue?
78

Taste
Tastereceptors inthetonguesendinformationviathefacialandglossopharyngealnerves to
thehindbrain.Thetastereceptors of theanterior two-thirds ofthetongueareconnectedwith
sensoryfibers ofthefacialnerve.Thetastereceptors oftheposteriorthirdofthetongueare
connectedwithsensoryfibers of theglossopharyngeal.Notsurprisingly,thefacialandglos-
sopharyngealnerves alsocontrolthesalivaryglands.Theglossopharyngealnervesupplies the
largeparotidgland,andthefacialsupplies thesmallersubmandibularandsublingualglands
withparasympatheticsecretomotor fibers.
Thetastesensoryfibers inthefacialandglossopharyngealnerves formadistinctbundleinthe
hindbraincalledthesolitarytract,whichlies betweenthedorsalnucleus ofthevagus andthe
spinalvestibularnucleus.Thehindbraintastenucleus surroundingthesolitarytractis called
thenucleus ofthesolitarytract.
Thesolitarytractstands outin this hindbrain section becauseitis madeupofdark-stained
myelinatedfibers in an otherwisecellular areaoccupiedbycranialnervenuclei(arrow).
Thenucleus ofthesolitarytractprojects tothemedialpartoftheventroposteriornucleus of
thethalamus andthetasteinformationis thensentfromthethalamus totheinsularcortexand
thefrontaloperculum.
Thetastereceptors inthetonguehaveonlyalimitedrangeofperception(salt,sweet,sour,
bitter,andumami),andmuchofwhatwethinkofas 'taste' is actuallybasedoninformation
fromtheolfactorysystem.Odors fromfoodinthemouthreachtheolfactoryreceptors inthe
roofofthenose.Theimportanceoftheolfactoryinformationinappreciatingthetasteoffood
becomes obvious whenan infectionblocks olfactoryreceptioninthenose,suchas happens
withthecommoncold.Withnoolfactoryreception,foodseems tolosealmostallits taste.
Questions for repetition
- Whichnerves innervatethetastecells of thetongue?
- Whatis thenameofthefusionofthenervefibers ofthetastecellinnervatingnerves?
- Whycanwetasteworsewhenwehaveacold?
79

THE AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
The autonomic nervous system (ANS)
Theeffectorsystems thatcontroltheinternalorgans,glands,andbloodvessels arecollec-
tivelycalledtheautonomicmotorsystembecausemostoftheirfunctions areautomaticand
involuntary.Theycanalsobecalledthevisceralmotorsystemtodistinguishitfromtheso-
maticmotorsystemthatcontrols thevoluntarymuscles.Theautonomicmotorsystemis di-
videdintosympatheticand parasympatheticgroups basedonfunctionandanatomy.Thesym-
patheticgroupis involvedinthecontrolof thearterialsystemandemergency(fightorflight)
responses.Incontrast,theparasympatheticgroupcontrols thenormalday-to-dayfunctions of
theinternalorgans,suchas salivationanddigestion. Finally,thelocalneuronnetworks which
coordinatetheactions ofthestomachandintestines areoftengroupedunderthenameenteric
nervous system.
Locationof thesympatheticandparasympatheticmotorcenters
Whereas themotorneurons thatsupplythevoluntarymuscles arefoundinallregions ofthe
brainstemandspinalcord, theautonomicmotorcenters occupyonlyrestrictedareas:the
sympatheticmotorcenters areonlylocatedinthoracicandupperlumbarspinalcordsegments
(T1toL2),andtheparasympatheticmotor centers areonlyfoundinthebrainstemandinthe
sacralspinalcord.Thecervicalspinalcord,thecoccygealspinalcord,andmostofthelumbar
spinalcordcontainneithersympatheticnor parasympatheticmotorcenters.Therestrictedori-
ginofthesympatheticandparasympatheticmotor systems poses achallengefordistribution
sinceeachsystemmustsupplystructures fromheadtotail.Thesympatheticandparasympa-
theticsystems possess differentsolutions todistributetheiractivitytoallappropriateparts of
thebody.
Thesympatheticsystemarises fromspinalnervesT2toL2,butitspreads its influence
throughthesympatheticchain,whichextends fromthebaseoftheskulltothepelvis.The
parasympatheticsystemhas its origins inthebrainstemandthesacralspinalcord.Therefore,
its solutionis throughthelongcourseofthevagus nerve,whichsupplies thoracicandabdom-
inalviscerafromthenecktothepelvis.Inthepelvis,itmeets thesacralparasympatheticout-
flow fromsacralnerves 2,3,and4.
80

Adiagramshowingthedistribution ofthesympatheticnervous system(in red)andthedis-
tribution oftheparasympatheticnervous system(in blue).
Autonomicganglia
Inthesomaticmotoroutflow,asinglemotor neuronconnects thebrainstemorspinalcordto
atargetmuscle,whereas,intheautonomicnervous system,themotoroutflow is formedbya
two-neuronchain.Thefirstautonomicmotor neuroninthechainis locatedinsidethebrain-
stemor spinalcord;itsends its axontoasecondeffectorneuronlocatedinaganglionoutside
ofthecentralnervous system.Theaxonofthesecond neurontheninnervates thetargetorgan.
Thetwo-neuronsystemenables asingleautonomicmotorneurontotriggerhundreds ofgan-
glioniceffectorneurons,producingwidespreadeffects,suchas arterialconstrictiontoraise
bloodpressure.
Becausethesecondmotorneurons intheautonomicchainareclusteredtogetheringanglia,
thefirstneuronis calledpreganglionic,andthesecondneuronis calledganglionic.Inthecase
ofthesympatheticnervous system,thegangliaareclosetothespinalcord,sothepregan-
glioniccells haveonlyshortaxons,andtheganglionicneuronaxons arelong.Inthecaseof
theparasympatheticnervous system,themotorgangliaarelocatedveryclosetothetargetor-
gans (someareevenembeddedinthewalls ofthetargetorgans),andsotheaxons ofthepre-
ganglioniccells areoftenrelativelylong,andtheganglionicaxons areveryshort.
Functions ofthesympatheticnervous system
Thesympatheticnervous systemis oftendescribedas afightorflightsystem.Itrapidlymobi-
lizes criticalbodilysystems intimes ofemergencyor stress,preparingthebodyforactionby
raisingbloodpressure,relaxingandopeningairways, mobilizingenergysources,andtempo-
rarilyshuttingdowndigestion.Mostimportantly,itincreases bloodflow tomuscles byshut-
tingdownbloodflow totheskinandintestines.
Thesympatheticnervous systemcanincreaseits influenceoverthebloodvessels ofthebody
bytriggeringthereleaseofadrenalineandnoradrenalinefromtheadrenalmedulla.Thesetwo
hormones haveessentiallythesameeffectas thepostganglionicsympatheticnerves,butbe-
causetheyremaininthebloodstream,thesehormones amplifyandprolongthesympathetic
actions andcaninfluencecells thatarenotdirectlyinnervatedbysympatheticnerves.
81

Sympatheticdistribution
Thepreganglionicsympatheticneurons arefoundonlyinthemiddleregionofthespinalcord,
fromthesecondthoracicsegmenttothefirstlumbarsegment.Distributiontomorerostraland
caudalareas ofthebodyis achievedbytheexistenceofthesympatheticchain–alongsystem
ofnerves thatruns alongsidethebodies ofthevertebrae.Thesympatheticmotorgangliaare
embeddedinthis chain,withapproximatelytwentygangliaoneachside.Fromtheganglia,
postganglionicsympatheticfibers aredistributedtoalllevels oftheheadandtrunkandalsoto
thelimbs.
Functions oftheparasympatheticnervous system
Theparasympatheticnervous systemis responsibleforthenormalday-to-dayfunctions ofthe
internalorgans (arolewhichcanbedescribedas 'restanddigest').Parasympatheticactions on
thecardiovascularsystemareoppositetothoseof thesympatheticnervous system;the
parasympatheticoutflow lowers theheartrateandbloodpressure.Theparasympatheticner-
vous systemdoes notsend nerves tothelimbs,soits roleis restrictedtotheglands andorgans
oftheheadandtrunk.Itis alsoresponsiblefor penileerectionandbladderemptying.
Parasympatheticdistribution
Thecranialparasympatheticnerves supplythepupilandciliarymuscle(oculomotornerve),
smallsecretoryglands oftheeyeandnose,smallsalivaryglands (facialnerve),theparotid
gland(glossopharyngealnerve),andorgans of theneck,thoraxandabdomen(thevagus
nerve).Thevagus parasympatheticsupplygoes tothelarynx,esophagus,lungs,heart,stom-
ach,andthesmallandlargeintestines.Thesacralpreganglionicneurons supplyeffector neu-
rons inthesigmoidcolon,rectum,bladder,andgenitalia.
Transmittersubstances intheautonomicnervous system
Allsympatheticandparasympatheticpreganglionicmotorneurons arelikesomaticmotor
neurons inthattheyuseacetylcholineas their transmittersubstance.Theparasympathetic
ganglionicneurons arealsocholinergic.However,thesympatheticganglioniceffectorneu-
rons arenoradrenergic.
Higher autonomiccontrol
Themotorneurons oftheautonomicnervous systemareregulatedbycenters inthehypothal-
amus andbrainstem.Thesecenters controlvitalfunctions ofthecardiovascularandrespira-
torysystems,as wellas salivation,swallowing,digestionperistalsis,defecation,andurina-
tion.Atalevelabovethebrainstem,thehypothalamus triggers theseautonomicfunctional
centers as partofmoresignificantbehavioralresponses,suchas thoseinvolvedinaggression.
Angeris associatedwithincreases inheartrate,blood pressure,andrespiratoryrate.
Theentericnervous system(ENS)
Thenetworks ofneurons embeddedinthewallof thegut,whichregulateandcoordinateits
activity,arecalledtheentericnervous system.This subdivisionof theautonomicnervous sys-
temdeserves auniquenamebecauseitis solarge.Inhumans,itcontains 200-600million
neurons,morethanintheentirespinalcord.Theentericnervous systemcontrols thecontrac-
tions andsecretions ofthestomach,intestines,andotherdigestiveorgans.Althoughthecen-
tralautonomicnervous systeminfluences theENS,itis capableofindependentactionthrough
its ownreflexsystems.Theentericnervous systemis alsofunctionallylinkedtothebody's
immunesystemtohelpdefendagainstinvasivemicroorganisms inthegut.Inmanyways,the
entericnervous systemseems tobeevolutionarilyolderthanthecentralnervous system,pre-
sumablybecausefoodintakeanddigestionarepriorities forsimpleorganisms.
82

Theentericnervous systemuses abouttwentydifferenttransmittersubstances,themostim-
portantof whichareacetylcholine,vasoactiveintestinalpolypeptide(VIP),nitricoxide(NO),
GABA,andserotonin.Complexnetworks intheentericnervous systemcanlearntoadaptto
challenges intheabsenceofCNS control.InHirschsprung's disease,thereis acongenitalab-
senceofparasympatheticinnervationof thesigmoidcolon,whichmakes thesuffererunable
todefecate.Treatmentconsists of removalofthenon-innervatedregionofthecolon.Abouta
yearafter removingthedenervatedsection,theremainingcolonlearns todefecate.
Questions forrepetition
- How cantheautonomicnervous systembesubdivided?
- Withinwhichspinalcordsegments arethesympatheticmotorfibers located?
- How arethesympatheticganglialocatedinrelationtothespinalcordandeffectororgan?
- Namethreefunctions ofthesympatheticandparasympatheticnervous systems.
- Namethreeneurotransmitters thatplayaroleintheentericnervous system.
83

BLOOD SUPPLY TO THE BRAIN
The blood supply to the brain
Arterialsupply
Thearterialsupplytothebraincomes fromtwointernalcarotidarteries atthefrontandtwo
vertebralarteries attheback.Eachinternalcarotidarterydivides intoalargermiddlecerebral
arteryandasmalleranteriorcerebralartery.Thetwovertebralarteries jointoformthebasilar
artery,which supplies thebrainstem.Thebasilararterydivides toformthetwoposterior
cerebralarteries.Thecarotidandbasilarsystems arelinkedtogetherbysmallcommunicating
arteries toformanarterialcircle(thecircleofWillis) atthebaseofthebrain.
ThearterialcircleofWillis is formedbythetwoposterior cerebralarteries (branches ofthe
basilar artery)andbranches of theinternalcarotidartery(themiddlecerebralartery,
anterior cerebralartery.Theposterior andanterior communicatingarteries completethe
circle.
Themiddlecerebralarterysupplies mostof thelateralsurfaceofthecerebralcortex.The
anterior cerebralarterysupplies themedialsideof thefronthalfofthecortexandastrip
aroundtheanteriorandsuperior marginof thelateralcortex.Theposteriorcerebralartery
supplies mostoftheoccipitallobe,includingthevisualcortex.
Thethreemaincerebralarteries senddeepperforatingbranches todeepcerebralstructures
(suchas theinternalcapsule) beforereachingtheir corticalbranches.
84

The arterial supply to the lateral cerebrum by the middle cerebral artery (red), the anterior
cerebralartery(green),andtheposterior cerebralartery(blue).
Venous drainageofthebrain
Theveinsofthecerebrumendinduralvenoussinusesthatsurroundthebrain.Theduralsinuses
areembeddedintheduramater,andtheydrainintotheinternaljugularvein.
The venous sinuses also drain the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) into the bloodstream. The CSF is
absorbedintothevenoussinusesthrougharachnoidgranulations,whichareevaginationsofthe
arachnoid mater. The most prominent dural sinuses are the superior sagittal sinus, the inferior
sagittalsinus, theoccipitalsinus,andthetransversesinus.
85

Venous drainage of the brain. The superior sagittal sinus collects blood from the lateral
aspectofthecerebralhemispheres.Thesuperiorsagittalsinusformstwotransversesinuses,
which drain into the internal jugular vein. The Inferior sagittal sinus forms the straight
sinus,which joins thejunction of thesuperior sagittalandtransversesinuses.
Questions forrepetition
- Whicharteries formtheCircleofWillis?
- Thespeechcenters areinthesupplyareaofwhich largerartery?
- Whatarethestructures calledinwhichthespinalfluidis absorbedintothevenous si-
nuses?
86

THE CIRCULATION OF CEREBROSPINAL FLUID
The cerebrospinal fluid and its circulation
Thebrainand spinalcordaresurroundedbythreemeningeallayers–athickdurallayernextto
thebone,athinarachnoidlayer deeptothedura,andathinpiallayeronthesurfaceofthe
brainandspinalcord.Thespacebetweenthearachnoidandthepia(thesubarachnoidspace)
is filledwithaclearliquidcalledcerebrospinalfluid(CSF).Thesoftstructureofthebrain
makes itvulnerabletomechanicaldamage;therefore,thecerebrospinalfluidacts as ashock
absorber toprotectitagainstinjury.
Overviewoftheventricular system;HenryGray(1918)AnatomyoftheHuman Body.
Circulation
TheCSF is manufacturedinsidethebrainbythechoroidplexuses ofthebrainventricularsys-
tem.Theventricularsystemof thecerebrumconsists oftwolateralventricles -oneinside
each cerebralhemisphere.Thelateralventricles drain intothethirdventricle,anarrow slit
betweenthetwohalves ofthehypothalamus andthalamus.TheCSF thentravels alongathin
tubeinthemidbraincalled theaqueduct.Theaqueductdrains intothefourthventricle,
betweenthecerebellumandthehindbrain.Finally,thefluidescapes throughthreeholes inthe
roofofthefourthventricletoreachthesubarachnoidspace.Cerebrospinalfluidis reabsorbed
intothebloodcirculationbyspecializedstructures in thewalls oflargeveins thatlinethein-
sideoftheskull.
87

Themainpartofthechoroidplexus lies inthemedialwallofthebodyandtheinferiorhornof
thelateralventricle.Nevertheless,groups of choroidplexus cells arepresentintheroofofthe
thirdventricleandtheroof ofthelowerhalfof thefourthventricleas well.Ifcerebrospinal
fluidcirculationis blocked,CSF willaccumulateintheventricularsystemofthecerebral
hemispheres.Graduallythecerebralventricles willbeforcedtoexpand,andcells inthe
cerebralcortexwillbekilledbycompression.This conditionis knownas hydrocephalus.
Theblood-brainbarrierandthecircumventricular organs
Theblood-brainbarrierprevents particular molecules inthebloodstreamfromreachingthe
brain's tissues.This systemhelps protectthebrainfrombacteria,viruses,andchemicaltoxins
thatcouldcausedamage.Theblood-brainbarrier is createdbymembranespecializations in
thewalls oftheendothelialcells of thebraincapillaries.Water-solublemolecules cannotpass
throughthecellularmembraneoftheendothelialcells andsoareunabletoreachtheextracel-
lularfluidofthebraintissues.However,smalllipid-solublemolecules cantravelthroughthe
membrane–afactorthatpromptedthedevelopmentof lipid-solubledrugs toreachthebrain.
Theblood–brainbarrieris notpresentinthecircumventricularorgans ofthebrain.Theseare
small,specializedareas in thewalls ofthethirdandfourthventricles.Neurons intheventricu-
larorgans areabletomonitorthelevels of certainchemicals inthebloodstream.
Questions forrepetition
-Whereisthespinalfluidformed?
-Describetheflowofspinalfluid.
-Inwhichareascanneuronsobtaininformationaboutchemicalcomponentsoftheblood?
88

STAINING AND IMAGING
Staining and imaging - Fundamentals
Informationaboutthedetailedstructureof thebrainandspinalcordcanbegatheredfromthe
microscopicstudyofthinsections thathavebeenstainedtoshow thepresenceofnervecells
andtheirprocesses.
Cutting thin sections
Thinsections canbecutfromfreshbraintissuethathas beenfrozen,butinmostcases,brain
sections arecollectedfrombraintissuethathas beenpreservedwithafixativechemicallike
formalin.Thinsections arecutwithamicrotome–aspecialslicingmachinecuttingsections
rangingfrom5to100micrometers (µm) inthickness. Formalin-fixedtissueis usuallypre-
paredfor sectioningbyembeddingitinparaffinwaxorcelloidin,butitcanalsobefrozenbe-
foresectioning.
Staining brain sections
Thetwoclassicstainingmethods aretheNisslstainforstainingneuroncellbodies andstains
formyelinatedaxons.Nisslstains useavarietyof dyes,suchas thioninandcresylviolet,to
revealdetails ofthecellbodyandnucleus ofneurons andglia.TheNisslstainis mostintense
innucleoliandintheroughendoplasmicreticulumofneurons.
In this Nissl-stainedsection ofrathippocampus,someneurons arepackedtightlytogether,
sotheyseemtoformacontinuous lineofvioletcolor.In other areas,cells can beseen like
grains of sandscatteredover theimage.Itis impossibletodistinguish between smallneur-
ons andgliaatthis magnification clearly.
Stains thatshow thepresenceof myelinhavebeenverywidelyusedinthestudyofhuman
brains for overacentury.Thestains canbeappliedto histologicalsections andthickslices of
thehumanbrain.Themyelinstains mostcommonlyusedaretheWeigertorLuxolfastblue
methods.
89

Acoronalsection ofhuman brain stemstainedwith theWeigertmethodfor myelin.Large
tracts likethepyramids andthemediallemniscus stain darkly,whereas cellular areas like
theinferior oliveareunstained.
The Golgi method
AdisappointingfeatureofNisslstains is thattheyonlyshow thepresenceofneuronalcell
bodies.However,CamilloGolgibrilliantlysolvedthis problemattheendofthenineteenth
century.Golgidevelopedaremarkablesilver stainthatrevealeddetails ofdendrites andaxons
andcellbodies.Thecells andtheir processes arestainedblackagainstagoldenbackground.
TheGolgistainwas sousefulbecauseitonlystains aboutonepercentoftheneurons inthe
sectionbeingexaminedsothatindividualneurons canbeseeninisolation.Ifallneurons were
stained,theimagewouldbesolidblack.Theuseofthis stainlaunchedarevolutionintheun-
derstandingofbrainanatomypioneeredbytheSpaniardRamonyCajal.
This is athicksection ofthecerebralcortexstained with theGolgimethod.Thestain shows
details of thecellbody,dendrites,andaxon ofalargepyramidalcellin thelower halfofthe
image.
Untilthemiddleofthetwentiethcentury,almostallthatwas learnedaboutbrainstructure
camefromthestudyofGolgi-stainedsections.Thenextphaseofneuroanatomicalresearch
was launchedbyusinghistochemicalstains andmethods fortracingneuronalconnections.
Histochemical staining
Histochemicalstains areusedtomarkspecificcellularcomponents ofneurons orglia,fol-
lowedbyapplyingdyes attractedtothemarkedelements.Manyhistochemicalmethods are
90

aimedatdetectingthepresenceof enzymes,andthesetechniques usuallyworkbestonun-
fixedorlightlyfixed
sections inwhichtheenzymes areundamaged.
Acetylcholinesterase(AChE) staininguses s-acetylthiocholineiodideandethopropazineto
depositabrownproductwherevertheacetylcholinesteraseenzymeis presentandactive.
Sincemany
neurons havereceptors foracetylcholine,this techniquecanbeusedtocharacterize
regions ofstrongcholinergicactivityanddifferentiatebetweendifferentareas inthebrain.
Motorneurons containlargeamounts of acetylcholinesterase,andtheAChEstainis veryef-
fectiveinshowingtheirdistributioninthebrainstemandspinalcord.
ThevalueofAChEstainingcanbeseenintheadjacentAChEsectionofthehippocampus ina
ratbrainsection.Thestainreveals aremarkablelevelofdetailinthelayers andsub-layers of
thehippocampus.
Asection ofratbrain stainedtoshowthepresenceoftheenzymeacetylcholinesterasein the
hippocampus
Avarietyofotherhistochemicalstains havebeendevelopedtodetectthepresenceofother
transmittersubstances,suchas nitricoxide.
Zincandothermetalstains arebasedonmethods thatdepositsilverorfluorescentdyes
aroundions ofzincandotherheavymetals.TheTimm-Danschersilverstainis commonly
usedtoshow thepresenceofzinc.Zincis usedin
DNAregulationandsynapticplasticity,as wellas othercellularsignaling.Thatis whyzinc
stains canshow
long-termactivitypatterns andresponses tochange.
91

This is acoronalsection of ratbrain stainedwith theTimm-Danscher method.Thedark
silver deposits showtheregions thatcontain high concentrations ofzinc.
Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemicalstains useantibodies todetectthepresenceofparticularproteins in
neurons.
Themainchallengeforimmunohistochemistryis ensuringthatantibodies onlybindtothe
proteinof interestandnootherrelatedproteins.Calcium-bindingproteins (suchas calbindin,
calretinin,andparvalbumin)areoftenrestrictedtoparticularcellgroups,andimmunohisto-
chemicalmethods todetecttheseproteins areveryusefulinanatomicalmappingstudies.
This is asection ofthecerebellumofamarmosetmonkeyin which thepresenceofthecal-
cium-bindingprotein calbindin has been revealedbyimmunohistochemicalstaining.In
this section,thePurkinjecellbodies arestainedformingalinebetween thedarkbrown
stainedmolecular layer andthelightbrown stainedgranulecelllayer.
92

Neurofilaments arestructuralproteins presentincertaintypes ofneurons.Themonoclonalan-
tibodySMI-32is widelyusedbecauseitcandemonstratethepresenceofaparticularneurofil-
amentproteinindifferentstructures of thenervous system.NeuN is anantibodyspecificto
theNeuN nuclearproteinexpressedbynearlyallneurons andneveringlialcells.Afew
neurontypes (suchas thecerebellum's Purkinjecells)donotexpress theNeuN proteinand
arethereforeunlabelled.
Atransversesection ofmousespinalcordshowingthepresenceofNeuN antibody.Thecell
bodies anddendrites ofmotor neurons in theventralhorn areclearlystained.In thedorsal
horn,thestain shows thepresenceofmanytinyneurons.Weknowtheseareneurons
rather than gliabecauseglialcells donotcontain theNeuN protein.
Glialproteinmarkers areusedtodistinguishparticularglialcelltypes.GFAP(glialfibrillary
acidicprotein)identifies astrocytes,andother antibodies areusedtomarkproteins specificto
microgliaandoligodendrocytes.
Tracing connections in the nervous system
Untilabout1970,themosteffectivewayof tracingconnections inthenervous systemwas a
silverstainfordegeneratingaxons.Whenaparticular partofthenervous systemis damaged,
thedegeneratingaxons fromthedamagedneurons canbestainedwithasilverstainfirstde-
velopedbyNautaatMITaround1950.This techniquewas themainstayoftracingstudies be-
foreintroducingmoderntracingstudies,suchas thoseusinghorseradishperoxidase(HRP),
thatusenormalaxonaltransportmechanisms.HRPuses retrogradeaxonaltransporttomark
cellbodies afteritis pickedupintoaxonterminals.Still,manynewertracers,suchas cholera
toxinB,useanterogradetransporttoshow theterminaldistributionofparticularaxons.
93

Retrogradetracing.This imageshows agroupof neurons showingthepresenceoftheret-
rogradetracer DiI which hadbeen injectedin theregion oftheaxon terminals ofthese
neurons.Themarker was carriedbyretrogradetransportalongtheaxons toreach their
parentcellbodies
Thevalueoftracingdatadepends ontheaccuratelocalizationofthepointwherethetraceris
delivered.Theexactidentificationofthedesireddeliverypointis generallybasedontheuse
ofastereotaxicatlas.Stereotaxicatlases arethree-dimensionalmaps thatcanbeusedtodefine
thelocationofnucleiandtracts withreferencetotheselandmarks,suchas bregma,thatcan
belocatedduringsurgery.Sometracers canbedetectedintargetareas withinless thanaday,
butothers takeweeks toreachtheir destination.Tracers canbedetectedwithfluorescenceor
withhistochemicaltechniques.
Molecular genetics
Theabilityto targetgenes inmicewas developedinthe1980s byNobelPrizewinners Capec-
chi,Evans,andSmithies.Genetargetingcanknock-outgenes orinsert(knock-in)new genes
intodevelopingcells.Geneknock-ins andknock-outs usetechniques thatcanaddafunction-
inggenetotheorganismordisableageneitalreadyhas sothatits effectontheanimalcanbe
trackedthroughdevelopmentandadulthood.
Asagittalsection ofmousebrain showingtheexpression ofthegenePhox2b.Phox2bis
stronglyexpressedin thefacialnucleus (largeovalareanear theventralmargin).
94

MRI imaging
Amajor breakthroughinthe1990ledtotheuseofmagneticresonance(MRI)forimagingthe
brain.MRIrelies ontheabilitytoexcitespecifictypes ofatoms (usuallyhydrogeninwater
molecules)andtoimagethemsystematically.This allows detailedthree-dimensionalmaps to
beobtained.MRIresolution
depends onthestrengthofthemagneticfieldused.EarlyMRIimagingusedfieldstrengths of
1-3Tesla,
whichyieldedaresolutionof 1-3mm,butnew small-volumeMRIscanners use16Tesla
fields,whichcanresolvestructures inthe20-50µmrange.
An imageofaratbrain obtainedwith a9TeslaMRI scanner.
Questions for repetition
- Whatis stainedduringmyelinstaining?
- Whatstaincanbeusedtostainmyelin?
- Whichneurons areparticularlyrichinAChE?
- Whataxonaltransportmechanismdomanytracers use?
95



1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Cortical Pathways (Section 2, Chapter 15) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 2: Sensory Systems
Search
Chapter 15: Visual Processing: Cortical Pathways
Valentin Dragoi, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
(content provided by Chieyeko Tsuchitani, Ph.D.)
Reviewed and revised 07 Oct 2020
The visual system is unique as much of visual processing occurs outside the brain within the retina of the eye. The previous chapter
described how the light-sensitive receptors of the eye convert the image projected onto the retina into spatially distributed neural
activity in the first neurons of the visual pathway (i.e., the photoreceptors). Within the retina, the receptors synapse with bipolar
and horizontal cells, which establish the basis for brightness and color contrasts. In turn, the bipolar cells (the 2° visual afferent)
synapse with retinal ganglion cells and amacrine cells, which enhance contrast effects that support form vision and establish the
basis for movement detection. The information from the eye is carried by the axons of the retinal ganglion cells (the 3° visual
afferent) to the midbrain and diencephalon. This chapter will provide more information about visual pathway organization and the
visual processing that occurs within the brain.
15.1 The Visual Pathway from Retina to Cortex
As noted previously in the somatosensory sections, all sensory information must reach the cerebral cortex to be perceived and, with
one exception, reach the cortex by way of the thalamus. In the case of the visual system, the thalamic nucleus is the lateral
geniculate nucleus and the cortex is the striate cortex of the occipital lobe.
The Optic Nerve
Figure 15.1
The visual pathway with the course of
information flow from the right (green)
and left (blue) hemifields of the two eye's
visual fields.
The axons of the 3° visual afferents (the retinal ganglion cells) form the optic nerve fiber layer of the retina on their course to the
optic disc. At the optic disc, the 3° visual afferents exit the eye and form the optic nerve. The fibers of the optic nerve that originate
from ganglion cells in the nasal half of the retina (i.e., the nasal hemiretina) decussate in the optic chiasm to the opposite optic
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter15.html 1/15

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Cortical Pathways (Section 2, Chapter 15) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
tract (Figure 15.1). Consequently, each optic tract contains retinal ganglion cell axons that originate in the nasal half of the
contralateral retina and the temporal half of the ipsilateral retina. Recall that the ipsilateral temporal hemiretina and the
contralateral nasal hemiretina have projected on them the images of corresponding halves of their visual fields. For example, the
temporal (left) hemiretina of left eye and the nasal (left) hemiretina of right eye both have projected on them the right halves of
their respective visual fields. Consequently, each optic tract has within it axons representing the contralateral half of the visual field.
The axons in the optic tract terminate in four nuclei within the brain (Figure 15.2):
the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus - for visual perception;
the superior colliculus of the midbrain - for control of eye movements;
the pretectum of the midbrain - for control of the pupillary light reflex; and
the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the hypothalamus - for control of diurnal rhythms and hormonal changes.
Figure 15.2
The inferior surface of the brain illustrating the visual pathway.
The termination sites of the retinal ganglion cell axons in three
nuclei that are not considered a part of the visual pathway are
also illustrated. They include the hypothalamus, pretectum and
the superior colliculus.
The Lateral Geniculate Nucleus
The vast majority of optic tract fibers terminate on neurons in the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) of the thalamus (Figure 15.3A).
Like the retina, the lateral geniculate nucleus is a laminated structure, in this case, with six principal layers of cells (Figure
15.3B).
The largest cells form the deepest two (magnocellular) layers
Smaller cells form the upper four (parvocellular) layers
Thin layers of the smallest cells (i.e., the koniocellular neurons) are interposed between these principal layers.
The optic tract fibers (3° visual afferents) from each eye synapse in different layers of the LGN. Consequently, each LGN neuron
responds to stimulation of one eye only.
Figure 15.3
Structures of the visual pathway (A). The neurons of the lateral geniculate
nucleus form 6 layers that are visible when stained for Nissl substance (B).
The magnocellular layers (1 and 2) appear darker as the cells in these
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter15.html 2/15

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Cortical Pathways (Section 2, Chapter 15) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
layers are larger and contain more Nissl substance than the cells in the
parvocellular layers (3 through 6).
The functional properties of LGN neurons are similar to those of retinal ganglion cells.
The LGN neurons are monocular (i.e., respond to stimulation of one eye only) and have concentric (center-surround) receptive
fields. The LGN neurons are segregated into three major groups:
The neurons in the magnocellular layers (mLGN cells)
process M-retinal ganglion cell inputs
behave like M-retinal ganglion cells
have relatively large center-surround receptive fields
are color insensitive
are most sensitive to movement of visual stimuli
The neurons in the parvocellular layers (pLGN cells)
process P-retinal ganglion cell inputs
behave like P-retinal ganglion cells
have relatively small center-surround receptive fields
are color sensitive
are well suited for detecting contrasts that form the basis for shape/form discrimination.
A third group, the koniocellular neurons (kLGN)
process P-retinal ganglion cell inputs
behave like P-retinal ganglion cells
have the smallest concentric receptive fields
have stronger color sensitivity than P-retinal ganglion cells
are well suited for detecting colors that aid in shape/form discrimination.
The axons of these different types of LGN neurons terminate in different layers or sublayers of the primary visual cortex.
Visual Cortical Areas
The primary visual cortical receiving area is in the occipital lobe. The primary visual cortex is characterized by a unique layered
appearance in Nissl stained tissue.
Figure 15.4
Nearly the entire caudal half of
the cerebral cortex is dedicated to
processing visual information. A
lateral view of the left cerebral
hemisphere (A). A view of the
medial surface of the right
hemisphere (B). The primary
motor cortex (i.e., the precentral
gyrus), and the primary
somatosensory receiving area
(i.e., the postcentral gyrus) are
represented in red and blue,
respectively. The numbers provide
the Brodmann Area designation.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter15.html 3/15

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Cortical Pathways (Section 2, Chapter 15) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
Consequently, it is called the striate cortex. It includes the calcarine cortex, which straddles the calcarine fissure, and extends
around the occipital pole to include the lateral aspect of the caudal occipital lobe (Figure 15.4, Area 17).
Figure 15.5
The course of the optic radiations from the lateral geniculate nucleus of
the thalamus to the striate cortex of the occipital lobe is illustrated in a
lateral view of the left side of the brain.
The LGN neurons (4° visual afferents) send their axons in the internal capsule to the occipital lobe where they terminate in the
striate cortex (Figure 15.5).
The LGN axons fan out as the optic radiations of the internal capsule and travel through the temporal, parietal and occipital
lobes.
The LGN axons in the sublenticular segment of the optic radiations pass below the lenticular nuclei, loop around the inferior
horn of the lateral ventricle within the temporal lobe and swing posteriorly to form Meyer’s loop.
Once around the inferior horn, they travel up to the inferior bank of the striate cortex, where they terminate.
The LGN axons in the retrolenticular segment of the internal capsule pass superiorly through the parietal lobe to end in the
superior bank of the striate cortex.
The striate cortex (Figure 15.6) is considered to be the primary visual cortex or V1, as
most LGN axons terminate in V1
all V1 neurons respond to visual stimuli exclusively
ablating V1 results in blindness
electrical stimulation of V1 elicits visual sensations.
The striate cortex is involved in the initial cortical processing of all visual information necessary for visual perception and its
damage results in loss of vision in the contralesional hemifield.
Figure 15.6
The topographic map of the left halves of the visual fields in the medial aspect
of the right striate cortex. Note that the neurons representing the visual field
center extend around the occipital pole into the lateral surface of the occipital
lobe. This results in a disproportionate representation of the central field when
compared to the cortical area representing the peripheral visual field.
The color (kLGN), shape (pLGN) and movement (mLGN) information from the thalamus are sent to different neurons within V1 for
further processing in V1 and then sent onto different areas of the extrastriate visual cortex.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter15.html 4/15

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Cortical Pathways (Section 2, Chapter 15) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
Server Error
404 - File or
directory not
found.
The resource you are Figure 15.7
looking for might have The responses of a
"shape-form" type
been removed, had its
primary visual cortex
name changed, or is
neuron is recorded
temporarily unavailable.
while a light bar is
flashed on and off the
screen. For each of the
frames, the light bar has
a different orientation.
The neuron displays a
preference (i.e.,
produces a maximal
response) for a light bar
centered and parallel to
the long axis of the
receptive field.
V1 blob cells: Some V1 cells resemble kLGN neurons. They are
monocular (i.e., respond to stimulation of one eye only).
color sensitive.
characterized by small, concentric receptive fields.
found in clusters (.e., blob cells).
a special target of the kLGN axon terminals.
The P-stream information processed by the V1 blob cells is used in color perception, color discrimination and the learning and
memory of the color of objects. The blob cells are the "color" processing cells of V1.
V1 interblob cells: Most V1 interblob cells are
binocular (i.e., respond to stimulation of either eye).
not color sensitive.
characterized by elongated (rectangular-shaped) receptive fields that may or may not have a center-surround type
organization.
found around the clusters of color-sensitive V1 blob cells.
exhibit ocular dominance (i.e., respond best to stimulation of a preferred eye).
exhibit orientation specificity (i.e., respond best when the stimulus is oriented in a particular plane).
Location specific V1 interblob cells: One subset of V1 interblob cells responds best when the stimulus is in a specific location of the
receptive field (i.e., they also exhibit location specificity).
The P-stream information processed by the V1 interblob cells that exhibit orientation and location specificity but are not motion
sensitive is used in object perception, discrimination, learning and memory or in spatial orientation. These interblob cells are the
"shape/form" processing cells and the "location" processing cells of V1.
Movement sensitive V1 interblob cells: A second subset of interblob cells respond best to moving stimuli (i.e., exhibit movement
sensitivity, Figure 15.8) without a preference for the direction of movement.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter15.html 5/15

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Cortical Pathways (Section 2, Chapter 15) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
Server Error
Figure 15.8
404 - File or directory not
The responses of a "motion
found. sensitive" primary visual cortex
neuron recorded in response to
The resource you are looking for might movement of a light bar across the
have been removed, had its name neuron's receptive field from left to
changed, or is temporarily unavailable. right.
Server Error Figure 15.9
The responses of a "motion
sensitive" primary visual cortex
neuron recorded in response to
404 - File or directory not
movement of a light bar across the
found. neuron's receptive field. The neuron
responds vigorously to movement in
The resource you are looking for might one direction (i.e., from left to right
have been removed, had its name as in Figure 15.8) and poorly to
changed, or is temporarily unavailable. movement in the opposite direction
(i.e., from right to left).
Consequently, this neuron exhibits
directional sensitivity.
Direction specific V1 interblob cells: A third subset displays a preference for movement in a particular direction (i.e., some also
exhibit directional sensitivity, Figure 15.9).
The M-stream of information processed by the motion sensitive V1 interblob cells is used to detect object movement and
direction/velocity of movement and to guide eye movements. These motion-sensitive interblob cells are the "motion detecting” cells
of V1.
Extrastriate Visual Cortex. The extrastriate cortex includes all of the occipital lobe areas surrounding the primary visual cortex
(Figure 15.4, Areas 18 & 19). The extrastriate cortex in non-human primates has been subdivided into as many as three functional
areas, V2, V3, and V4. The primary visual cortex, V1, sends input to extrastriate cortex and to visual association cortex. The
information from the “color”, “shape/form”, "location" and “motion” detecting V1, neurons are sent to different areas of the
extrastriate cortex (Figure 15.10).
Damage to extrastriate cortex does not result in a “simple loss of vision”; rather it results in higher order visual perceptual deficits
including the failure to recognize objects, colors and/or movement of objects.
Figure 15.10
The flow of visual information from
the primary visual cortex to other
cortical areas depends on the type of
information being processed.
Information used to locate objects
and detect their motion is sent to
more superior cortex (a.k.a. the
dorsal stream). Information
necessary to detect, identify and use
color and shape information is sent to
inferior cortical areas (a.k.a., the
ventral stream).
Visual Association Cortex. The visual association cortex extends anteriorly from the extrastriate cortex to encompass adjacent
areas of the posterior parietal lobe and much of the posterior temporal lobe (Figure 15.4, Areas 7, 20, 37 & 39). In most cases,
these areas receive visual input via the extrastriate cortex, which sends color, shape/form, location and motion information to
different areas of the visual association cortex (Figure 15.10).
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter15.html 6/15

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Cortical Pathways (Section 2, Chapter 15) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
The Dorsal Stream: The neurons in the parietal association cortex and superior and middle temporal visual association cortex
(Areas 7 and 39 and the superior part of Area 37 in Figure 15.4) have binocular receptive fields and process P-channel information
about object location and M-channel information about object movement.
These dorsally located visual association neurons are responsible for producing our sense of
spatial orientation
binocular fusion/depth perception
the location, the movement and the movement direction and velocity of objects in space.
The dorsal stream processes information about the “where” of the visual stimulus (Figure 15.10).
Damage the dorsal visual association cortex results in deficits in spatial orientation, motion detection and in guidance of visual
tracking eye movements.
The Ventral Stream: The neurons in the inferior temporal visual association cortex (Area 20 and the inferior part of Areas 37 & 39
in Figure 15.4) process P-channel information about object color and form.
These ventrally located visual association neurons are responsible for processing information necessary for our abilities to
recognize objects and colors
read text and
learn and remember visual objects (e.g., words and their meanings)
This ventral stream processes information about the “what” of the visual stimulus (Figure 15.10).
Damage to the inferior visual association cortex produces deficits in complex visual perception tasks, attention and
learning/memory.
15.2 Retinotopic Organization in the Visual Pathway
Clinical Examples
The topographic (spatial) relationships of retinal neurons are maintained throughout the visual system, which preserves the
retinotopic map of the visual world. That is, the retina is mapped onto the LGN and striate cortex in an organized (topographic)
fashion. Consequently, neighboring parts of retina project to neighboring parts of LGN and neighboring parts of LGN project to
neighboring parts of the striate cortex. This retinotopic organization in the visual pathway results in a spatial representation of the
visual field in the LGN and visual cortex.
Spatial Representation of the Retinal Image
You should recall the following regarding the spatial representation of the retinal image within the visual pathway.
The optic image on the retina is upside-down and left-right reversed.
The monocular visual fields of the two eyes overlap partially to form the binocular visual field .
The temporal hemiretina of one eye and the nasal hemiretina of the other eye have projected on them the images of
corresponding halves of their visual fields (Figure 15.1). For example, the temporal (left) hemiretina of left eye and the nasal
(left) hemiretina of right eye both have projected on them the right half of the visual fields of each eye.
Beyond the optic chiasm, the corresponding visual hemifields of the two eyes are represented in the contralateral side of the
visual pathway (Figure 15.1). For example, the left hemifield of both eyes are represented in the right optic tract, right lateral
geniculate nucleus, right optic radiations and right striate cortex.
The fibers of the optic radiation fan out into the temporal, parietal and occipital lobes on their course to the striate cortex.
Those forming the sublenticular optic radiations carry information about the superior hemifield, whereas those forming the
retrolenticular optic radiations carry information about the inferior hemifield (Figure 15.5). The optic radiation fibers traveling
the most direct course back to the striate cortex carry information about the central visual field.
There are many more receptor cells in the fovea and many more bipolar and ganglion cells in the macula than in the
periphery of the retina. Consequently, the central visual field is disproportionately represented in the visual system. That is,
more visual receptors, more optic nerve fibers and more LGN and cortical neurons are involved in processing and carrying
information about that portion of the retinal image representing the center of the visual field.
Visual Field Defects
Visual field defects are areas of loss of vision in the visual field. Visual field defects are detected by perimetry testing, during
which the patient fixates his eyes on a target and his ability to detect a small object in specific positions in space is determined.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter15.html 7/15

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Cortical Pathways (Section 2, Chapter 15) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
Figure 15.11
The binocular visual field
(top panel), perimetry
testing results for the
monocular visual fields
(middle panel) and a
simplified version of the
monocular visual fields
(bottom panel) of a person
with normal vision. In this
panel, the blind spot is
illustrated as a dark oblong
spot, whereas the central
visual field is illustrated as
a larger yellow circle.
Figure 15.11 illustrates perimetry test results for the two eyes of someone with normal vision. The bottom panel of Figure 15.11 is
a simplified illustration of the monocular visual fields used in the following examples of visual field defects. A visual field defect
provides clues to the structure(s) affected. That is, the area(s) of visual field loss and eye(s) exhibiting the visual field loss offer
clues about the site of the damage. The following examples of visual field losses should help you determine how well you can utilize
what you have learned thus far about the visual system.
15.3 Clinical Example #1
Figure 15.12
Ophthalmoscope examination of the fundus detects an
abnormality in the nasal hemiretina in the left eye of a diabetic
patient. Notice that the fundus of the patient's left eye appears to
the right, just as it appears on the right side of the physician
viewing the fundus.
Symptoms: The patient is having his semiannual physical examination. As he is diabetic, the physician examines his retinas and
performs a confrontation test of his visual fields. An abnormality is detected in his left fundus (Figure 15.12) but the confrontational
field test detects nothing.
Perimetry testing is requested.
Perimetry Test Results: The results indicate the right eye's visual field is normal and that there is peripheral a scotoma (i.e., loss of
vision that does not follow the boundaries of the visual field quadrants) in the left eye's temporal hemifield (Figure 15.13).
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter15.html 8/15

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Cortical Pathways (Section 2, Chapter 15) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
Figure 15.13
The fundus of each eye as seen by the physician (A). The perimetry map of
the monocular visual fields as viewed by the patient (B). The perimetry test
result for the left eye indicates a small loss of vision in the temporal
hemifield. The scotoma appears smaller in B as the view of the retina in A is
limited to approximately 35 degrees, which extends from the nasal edge of
the macula to slightly beyond the temporal edge of the optic disc.
Side & Retinotopicity of damage: The visual loss
is limited to the left eye
is in the temporal (left) hemifield
is associated with retinal abnormalities in the nasal hemiretina of the left eye
So you conclude that the visual defect involves
retinal damage in the left eye
damage located in the nasal half of the left retina (Figure 15.14, Lesion 1)
damage related to the patient's diabetes - diabetic retinopathy
Figure 15.14
This cartoon illustrates
the central visual
pathway (right panel)
and the effects of
lesions in the pathway
(left panel). The
numbered lesions in
the right panel
produce the
correspondingly
numbered visual field
defects in the left
panel.
Retinal Damage: A defect involving only the visual field of one eye indicates possible damage in the retina or optic nerve. If the
visual loss is confined to one eye, it is called a monocular visual field defect. Often retinal lesions are small and do not follow the
boundaries of the visual field quadrants. Such a visual field disorder is called a scotoma. A retinal visual field defect is most severe
when vision in the central field is affected, as in the case of macular degeneration. In macular degeneration, the patient will report
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter15.html 9/15

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Cortical Pathways (Section 2, Chapter 15) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
difficulty reading and seeing clearly and visual field testing will demonstrate that the patient has a central scotoma (i.e., is blind in
the visual field center).
15.4 Clinical Example #2
Figure 15.15
The perimetry test results indicates a
loss of vision over most of the visual
field of the left eye - with no loss in
the right eye's visual field. Notice
that the central visual field for the
left eye is represented by a black
spot, indicating a loss of central field
vision.
Symptoms: The patient complains of a sudden headache and loss of vision in his left eye. Ophthalmoscope examination does not
reveal abnormalities in the left eye1. However, confrontation testing indicates a severe loss of vision in the left eye.
The patient is referred for immediate neuroradiographic tests and perimetry testing.
Perimetry Test Results: The results indicate the right eye's visual field is normal and that there is a large visual loss encompassing
nearly all of the left eye's visual field (Figure 15.15).
Side & Retinotopicity of damage: The visual loss
does not appear to relate to changes in the retina of the left eye
is limited to the left eye
encompasses nearly the entire the visual field of the left eye
So, you conclude that the visual defect is
retrobulbar (beyond the retina or eye) (Figure 15.14, Lesion 2)
probably limited to optic nerve damage (only one eye affected)
Neural imaging results indicate an aneurysm on the left ophthalmic artery, which is compressing the left optic nerve (Figure 15.16).
Compression of the nerve prevents action potentials from the retina to travel to the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus.
Long-term compression may damage the nerve, however, of greater concern is the potential rupture of the aneurysm, which could
cause extensive brain damage.
Figure 15.16
A view of the inferior
surface of the brain
illustrating an aneurysm in
the left ophthalmic artery,
which is compressing the
left optic nerve.
Optic Nerve Damage: Each optic nerve contains the axons of retinal ganglion cells from one eye, e.g., the right nerve from the right
eye. Damage to one optic nerve will produce a monocular visual field defect. Destruction of one optic nerve (e.g., crushed by a
tumor on the orbital surface of the frontal cortex) will result in the total loss of vision in the ipsilesional eye.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter15.html 10/15

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Cortical Pathways (Section 2, Chapter 15) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
15.5 Clinical Example #3
Figure 15.17
The perimetry test results for Example 3 indicate a
bitemporal hemianopia (i.e., a bilateral visual defect
involving the temporal hemifields of both eyes).
Notice that only the temporal halves of the two
central areas exhibit a visual loss (i.e., appear as dark
hemicircles).
Symptoms: At his annual physical exam, the patient complains of a general malaise and changes in his vision that he noticed while
playing soccer. He said he was often "blindsided" on the playing field because he "couldn't see players approaching him from the
side". Ophthalmoscope examination does not reveal abnormalities in either eye2. Confrontation field testing indicates a constriction
of the temporal hemifields of both eyes. The patient is referred for neuroradiographic tests and perimetry testing.
Perimetry Test Results: The results indicate a bitemporal hemianopia, i.e., loss of vision in the temporal hemifields of both eyes
(Figure 15.17).
Side & Retinotopicity of damage: The visual loss
is not related to changes in the retina of either eye
involves vision in both eyes
encompasses only the temporal hemifields
You conclude that the visual field defect is related to damage that
is retrobulbar (beyond the retina)
involves the optic chiasm (Figure 15.14, Lesion 3)
Neural imaging results (Figure 15.18) indicate a pituitary adenoma that is compressing the optic chiasm. Compression of the
decussating nerve fibers prevents action potentials from the nasal hemiretina to reach the contralateral lateral geniculate nucleus of
the thalamus. As the tumor grows larger it will crush the optic chiasm, destroying it and eventually compromising the remaining
optic nerve fibers.
Figure 15.18
A view of the inferior surface of the brain illustrating a
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter15.html 11/15

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Cortical Pathways (Section 2, Chapter 15) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
pituitary tumor, which is compressing the optic chiasm.
Optic Chiasm Damage: The fibers of the optic nerve that originate from ganglion cells in the nasal half of the retina decussate in
the optic chiasm to the opposite optic tract (Figure 15.1). The crossing fibers of the optic chiasm may be crushed by a pituitary
tumor. Damage to the optic chiasm produces a unique form of visual field deficit, a bitemporal hemianopia (Figure 15.17). Recall
that the fibers of the optic chiasm carry information about objects in the temporal hemifields of both eyes (i.e., the right hemifield
of the right eye and the left hemifield of the left eye). Consequently section of the optic chiasm produces a visual loss in only the
temporal half of the visual field of each eye. When the patient views the world out of both eyes, the boundary of his binocular visual
field is narrower than normal.
15.6 Clinical Example #4
Figure 15.19
The perimetry test results indicate a right
homonymous hemianopia (i.e., a binocular visual
defect involving the right hemifields of both eyes)
with macular sparing (i.e., central field vision was
not affected).
Symptoms: A patient is brought to the emergency room complaining of a severe headache and nausea. He is conscious and
coherent when examined in the ER. Ophthalmoscope examination does not reveal abnormalities in either eye. Confrontation field
testing indicates a visual loss in the right hemifield of both eyes.
The patient is referred for neuroradiographic tests and perimetry testing.
Perimetry Test Results: The results indicate a right homonymous hemianopia with macular sparing (Figure 15.19).
Side & Retinotopicity of damage: The visual loss
is not related to changes in the retina of either eye
involves field losses for both eyes
involves the right hemifields
is homonymous or congruent
spares the central visual field
You conclude that the visual field defect is related to damage that
is retrobulbar (beyond the retina)
is retrochiasmatic or postchiasmatic (beyond the optic chiasm)
involves the left calcarine cortex
may involve hemorrhage from a branch of the left posterior cerebral artery
spared the more caudal and lateral parts of the striate cortex, which receives collateral blood flow from branches of the middle
cerebral artery
Neural imaging results indicate injury to the rostral half of the left calcarine cortex, which receives blood from the left posterior
cerebral artery (Figure 15.20). Recall that the rostral calcarine cortex processes information from the visual field periphery, whereas
the caudal and lateral striate cortex process information derived from the visual field center.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter15.html 12/15

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Cortical Pathways (Section 2, Chapter 15) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
Figure 15.20
The perimetry test results indicate a right homonymous
hemianopia with macular sparing. The medial and inferior
portions of the occipital lobe receives blood from branches of
the posterior cerebral artery.
Calcarine Cortex Damage. An infarct created by obstruction of, or a hemorrhage in, branches of the posterior cerebral artery may
result in damage to the rostral calcarine cortex. Damage to the calcarine cortex on one side may produce a binocular, contralateral
homonymous hemianopia with macular sparing (Figure 15.20). A collateral blood supply from branches of the middle cerebral
artery is believed to spare the cortical neurons in the caudal and lateral regions of the striate cortex, which receive information
from the macular area.
15.7 Clinical Example #5
Figure 15.21
The cortical areas involved in color perception
and face recognition are illustrated in the left
hemisected brain with cerebellum removed
(A). Distribution of the major branches of the
anterior and posterior cerebral arteries
viewed on the inferior and medial surfaces of
the brain with the cerebellum removed (B).
The location of the lesion is colored red.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter15.html 13/15

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Cortical Pathways (Section 2, Chapter 15) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
Symptoms: A patient, who is stabilized after suffering a stroke two months earlier, is referred to a neuro-ophthalmologist for
evaluation. The patient does not appear to be blind but has problems with processing visual information. For example, the patient
cannot describe the color of an object presented to him or recognize faces. He has normal spatial orientation and motion detection.
The patient is referred for perimetry testing.
Perimetry Test Results: The results indicate no consistent loss of vision. However, it is difficult to obtain consistent results because
the patient tires easily and his attention appears to wander.
Side & Retinotopicity of damage: The patient
is not blind in either eye
does not have deficits in detecting the location or movement of objects
does not exhibit the symptom of "neglect" (i.e., visual inattention)
exhibits deficits in higher visual processing involving color and object recognition
You conclude that the neurological defect is
not related to damage in the visual pathway from the eye to the striate cortex
not related to damage in the middle or superior temporal gyrus
not related to damage in the parietal lobe
related to damage in the inferior temporal gyrus (Figure 15.21)
involving branches of the posterior cerebral artery that supply the inferior temporal gyri
Neural imaging results indicate damage to the caudal portion of the inferior temporal lobe, which normally receives blood from
branches of the posterior cerebral artery.
Extrastriate or Association Cortex Damage: While destruction of the primary visual cortex produces blindness in the contralesional
hemifield, damage to cortical areas surrounding the striate cortex does not Instead, they may produce profound deficits in the
higher order-processing of visual information. For example, bilateral damage to a small area of the inferior temporal gyrus (Figure
15.21) produces a loss in the ability to recognize faces. Damage to more superior areas of the temporal lobe (area 39 in Figure
15.4) produces an inability to recognize or comprehend written words and/or passages. Damage to areas in the parietal cortex may
result in the inability to see motion (i.e., a moving object will be seen in “frames’’ in one place at one point in time and at another
place in a following period of time). The object does not appear to move; rather it appears to have jumped from one place to the
next. Damage to large areas involving the posterior parietal cortex and superior temporal cortex may result in the symptom of
"neglect", wherein objects in parts of the visual field are ignored or denied existence.
15.8 Summary
In this chapter, you have learned how the visual system is organized in the brain. You have learned that stimulus features extracted
by the retinal neurons (color, brightness contrast, movement) are kept segregated in separate “information channels” and
processed in parallel by different cells at all levels of the visual system. Information coded and carried by one million retinal
ganglion cells are distributed to hundreds of millions of cortical neurons in the occipital, parietal and temporal lobes. The perception
of a coherent visual image is recomposed out of these fragments of information by the simultaneous activation of large areas of
cortex. You have also learned how the spatial representation of the visual image is maintained by the retinotopic organization of the
visual system and learned how this information is useful in determining the location and extent of damage to the visual system by
examining the visual fields. Finally, you have learned that neuronal responses in visual cortex exhibit plasticity at different time
scales, short term (as adaptation and dynamics) and long term (as learning) – this plasticity allows visual cortex to construct an
accurate picture of the world that can rapidly adapt to match the changes in the environment.
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
Which of the following are characteristic of the primary visual cortex "blob" neurons? They:
A. are binocular and exhibit ocular dominance.
B. have color opponent receptive fields.
C. require a specific stimulus orientation.
D. have elongated receptive fields.
E. synapse with magnocellular lateral geniculate neurons.
Question 2 A B C D E
Make the best match between the below listed condition and the visual field defect. Match:
occlusional of the left posterior cerebral artery
A. Contralesional superior quadrantanopia with macular sparing
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter15.html 14/15

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Cortical Pathways (Section 2, Chapter 15) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | …
B. Contralesional inferior quadrantanopia with macular sparing
C. Contralesional homonymous hemianopia with macular sparing
D. Bitemporal hemianopia
E. Inability to recognize objects or colors
Question 3 A B C D E
Make the best match between the below listed condition and the visual field defect. Match: trauma to
the left temporal lobe
A. Contralesional superior quadrantanopia with macular sparing
B. Contralesional inferior quadrantanopia with macular sparing
C. Contralesional homonymous hemianopia with macular sparing
D. Bitemporal hemianopia
E. Inability to recognize objects or colors
Question 4 A B C D E
Make the best match between the below listed condition and the visual field defect. Match: lesion of
the optic chiasm
A. Contralesional superior quadrantanopia with macular sparing
B. Contralesional inferior quadrantanopia with macular sparing
C. Contralesional homonymous hemianopia with macular sparing
D. Bitemporal hemianopia
E. Inability to recognize objects or colors
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter15.html 15/15



1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Eye and Retina (Section 2, Chapter 14) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 2: Sensory Systems
Search
Chapter 14: Visual Processing: Eye and Retina
Valentin Dragoi, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
(content provided by Chieyeko Tsuchitani, Ph.D.)
Reviewed and revised 07 Oct 2020
In this chapter you will learn about how the visual system initiates the processing of external stimuli. The chapter will familiarize
you with measures of visual sensation by discussing the basis of form perception, visual acuity, visual field representation, binocular
fusion, and depth perception. An important aspect is the regional differences in our visual perception: the central visual field is
color-sensitive, has high acuity vision, operates at high levels of illumination whereas the periphery is more sensitive at low levels
of illumination, is relatively color insensitive, and has poor visual acuity. You will learn that the image is first projected onto a
flattened sheet of photoreceptor cells that lie on the inner surface of the eye (retina). The information gathered by millions of
receptor cells is projected next onto millions of bipolar cells, which, in turn, send projects to retinal ganglion cells. These cells
encode different aspects of the visual stimulus, and thus carry independent, parallel, streams of information about stimulus size,
color, and movement to the visual thalamus.
14.1 Measures of Visual Sensation
The condition of the visual system can be determined by examining various aspects of visual sensation. For example, the ability to
detect and identify small objects (i.e., visual acuity) can be affected by disorders in the transparent media of the eye and/or visual
nervous system. The inability to detect objects in specific areas of space (i.e., visual field defects) is often related to neural
damage.
Spatial Orientation and the Visual Field
The visual field is that area in space perceived when the eyes are in a fixed, static position looking straight ahead.
Figure 14.1
The monocular visual field is the area in space visible to one eye. As illustrated,
the nose prevents the field of the right eye from covering 180 degrees in the
horizontal plane. Inset. Perimetry testing provides a detailed map of the visual
field. As the nose, brow and cheeks occlude the view of the most nasal,
superior and inferior areas, respectively, the resulting monocular visual field
occupies a limited portion (colored blue) of the potential visual space.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter14.html 1/20

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Eye and Retina (Section 2, Chapter 14) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
The monocular visual field (Figure 14.1)
is that area of space visible to one eye
can be mapped parametrically
Perimetry testing provides a detailed map of the visual field. The potential visual field is described as a hemisphere.
However, it does not form a perfect hemisphere as the brow, nose and cheekbones obscure the view - most prominently
in the nasal hemisphere
is subdivided into two halves, the hemifields (Figure 14.1 Inset).
A horizontal line drawn from 0° to 180° through center of the field defines the superior & inferior hemifields.
A vertical line drawn from 90° to 270° through center point defines the left & right hemifields, which are often termed
the nasal and temporal hemifields.
may be further subdivided into quadrants:
the superior and inferior nasal quadrants
the superior and inferior temporal quadrants.
contains a blind spot,
a small area in which objects cannot be viewed
which is located within the temporal hemifield.
Figure 14.2
The binocular visual field.
As our eyes are angled
slightly toward the nose,
the monocular visual fields
of the left and right eyes
overlap to form the
binocular visual field
(colored red). Objects
within the binocular visual
field are visible to each
eye, albeit from different
angles.
The monocular visual field (Figure 14.1) is determined with one eye covered. The area of overlap of the visual field of one eye with
that of the opposite eye is called the binocular field (Figure 14.2). All areas of the binocular visual field are “seen” by both eyes.
The ability to locate objects in space and the ability to orient ourselves with respect to external objects are dependent upon the
representation of visual space within the nervous system. The clinical examination of the visual fields most commonly used is the
confrontation field test. It defines the outer limits of our subjective visual space. Neurological disorders of the visual system can
often be localized based on the area of blindness within the visual field.
Visual Acuity
Visual acuity is the ability to detect and recognize small objects visually depends on the refractory (focusing) power of the eye's
lens system and the cytoarchitecture of the retina.
Visual acuity is
measured under high illumination
the smallest size of a dark object in a light background that can be correctly identified
In the clinical setting, an eye chart
is used to measure the patient’s visual acuity.
consists of rows of black letters on a bright white background.
is used to measure visual acuity at a distance of 20 ft from the chart.
reports visual acuity as the ratio of the eye chart distance (i.e., 20 ft) to the “normal distance” of the lowest row of letters
correctly identified by the patient (e.g., row 3, which is 70 ft).
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter14.html 2/20

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Eye and Retina (Section 2, Chapter 14) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
Color Vision
Color vision is the ability to detect differences in the wavelengths of light is called color vision. Clinically it may be tested with an
Ishihara chart: a chart with spots of different colors that are spatially organized to form numbers that differ for ``normal” and
color-blind eyes.
As mentioned above, the human has a trichromatic visual system, whereby visible colors can be created by a mixture of red, green
and blue lights. The most common form of color blindness results in a confusion of red and green shades (i.e., red-green color
blindness). Most cases of color blindness result from an absent or defective gene responsible for producing the red or green
photopigment (protanopia, the lack of red; and deuteranopia, the lack of green). As these genes are located on the X chromosome,
color blindness is more common in males than in females.
Figure 14.3
LEFT. The visual field of the left eye is mapped parametrically. The dark dot in the
temporal hemifield represents the "blind spot" where nothing is seen. RIGHT. Visual
acuity is plotted as a function of distance (in degrees) from the center of the visual
field. The curve labeled "Light-adapted" was obtained under photopic illumination
levels and the curve labeled "Dark-adapted" was obtained under scotopic illumination
levels.
Regional differences: There are regional differences in color sensation, visual acuity and low-illumination sensitivity within the visual
field (Figure 14.3).
A small “blind spot” is
located in the temporal hemifield (Figure 14.3 Left)
where objects cannot be seen.
Vision in the visual field center
operates best under high illumination.
has the greatest visual acuity and color sensitivity
is ten times better than in the field periphery (Figure 14.3 Right)
represents the operation of the photopic (light-adapted) subsystem
Vision in the peripheral visual field
is more sensitive to dim light
operates under low illumination.
has little color sensitivity and poor spatial acuity (Figure 14.3 Right)
represents the operation of the scotopic (dark-adapted) subsystem
Binocular Fusion and Depth Perception
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter14.html 3/20

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Eye and Retina (Section 2, Chapter 14) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
Figure 14.4
The two eyes fixated on an object view the object and objects in the
background at slightly different angles. Consequently, the images on the
two retinas are slightly different and must be "fused" by the visual system.
The disparity in the retinal images at the two eyes also provides binocular
cues for depth perception.
When a pencil is held an arm’s length away with both eyes open, most individuals will see a single object and recognize it as a
pencil. However, if one rapidly closes each eye alternately (i.e., left eye closed, right eye opened, then right eye opened and left eye
closed); you should see the pencil “jumping” from left to right as you alternate the eye closure. This is so because the image in
each eye is slightly different (disparate): Notice that because each eye is located on either side of the nose, the viewing angle of
each eye is slightly different - especially when viewing near objects (Figure 14.4).
Although the area in space defined by the binocular visual field (Figure 14.4) represents corresponding areas of the monocular
visual fields, the angle at which this space is viewed by each eye is slightly different. Consequently, the images of the corresponding
(binocular) space are slightly different in each eye. The nervous system fuses these disparate binocular images to produce a single
image (e.g., of the pencil located an arm’s length away). The process of producing a single image from the two disparate monocular
images is called binocular fusion.
Clinically, binocular fusion is tested by holding up one or two fingers in front of the patient and asking the patient (who should be
wearing corrective lenses if they are normally worn) how many fingers they see. If the patient reports seeing four fingers when only
two are presented, the patient is unable to produce binocular fusion.
Binocular fusion permits the perception a single clear image and also provides extra cues for depth perception. That is, the
binocular disparity between the two images is used by the nervous system to allow the perception of a three-dimensional world
where the approximate distance of an object can be determined. The nervous system cannot fuse disparate binocular images when
the disparity is too great. When corresponding areas of the normal binocular visual field are not in alignment (e.g., in strabismus
where one eye deviates from the normal position and/or is paralyzed), the nervous system cannot fuse the disparate images and
gradually adapts by “ignoring” the image from the deviant eye. In fact, strabismus at birth, if uncorrected, may result in a form of
central blindness, amblyopia, where the image from the deviant eye is no longer represented at cortical levels of the nervous
system. The uncorrected, long-term amblyope is functionally blind in one eye and has poor depth perception.
14.2 The Image Forming Process
The transparent media of the eye function as a biconvex lens that refracts light entering the eye and focuses images of the external
world onto the light sensitive retina.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter14.html 4/20

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Eye and Retina (Section 2, Chapter 14) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
Refraction
Recall that light rays will bend when passing from one transparent medium into another if the speed of light differs in the two
media. However, parallel light rays will pass from air through a transparent body (e.g., flat lens) without bending if the light rays
are perpendicular to the lens surface (Figure 14.5, left). If the light strikes the lens surface at an angle, the light rays will be bent in
a line perpendicular to the lens surface (Figure 14.5, right).
Figure 14.5
The course of
light rays
passing
through a
transparent
lens are
illustrated.
LEFT: The
light rays are
entering
perpendicular
to the
surface of the
lens. RIGHT:
The light rays
are entering
at an angle to
the surface of
the lens and
are being
refracted by
the lens.
A biconvex lens, which is functionally similar to the eye's lens system, is flat only at its center. The surface of the area surrounding
the center is curved and not perpendicular to parallel light rays (Figure 14.6). Consequently, the curved surfaces of a biconvex lens
will bend parallel light rays to focus an image of the object emitting the light a short distance behind the lens at its focal point. The
image formed is clear only if the curvature of the lens is symmetrical in all meridians and all divergent light rays emitted by a point
source converge at the focal point.
Figure 14.6
The light rays emanating from a point source take divergent paths that enter a
biconvex lens at different points along the lens surface. The lens refracts the
light rays bringing them together at the focal point some distance from the
lens.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter14.html 5/20

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Eye and Retina (Section 2, Chapter 14) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
Figure 14.7
The eye's lens system functions like a
biconvex lens and focuses an image on the
retina that is inverted, left-right reversed and
smaller than the object viewed.
Note that the greater the curvature of the lens surface the greater is its refractive power and the closer is the focused image to the
lens. Note also that the image formed is inverted and left-right reversed (Figure 14.7).
The image formed by eye’s lens system is smaller than the object viewed, inverted (upside-down, Figure 14.6), and reversed
(right-left, Figure 14.7). As the image is inverted by the lens system, the superior (top) half of each eye’s visual field is projected
onto the inferior (bottom) half of each eye’s retina. Also, as the lens produces a reversed image, the temporal half of each visual
field is projected onto the nasal half of each eye’s retina1. Therefore, the temporal (left) hemifield of the left eye is projected onto
the nasal (right) half of the left eye’s retina and the nasal (left) hemifield of right eye is projected onto temporal (right) half of the
right eye’s retina. Consequently, the left hemifields of both eyes are projected onto the corresponding (right) halves of the two
retinas. It is critical that you understand the relationship between the visual field and the retinal areas and realize that
corresponding halves of the two monocular visual fields are imaged on corresponding halves of the two retinas. These relationships
form the neurological basis for understanding visual field defects.
Lens Accommodation
The eye must be able to change its refractive properties to focus images of both distant and nearby objects on the retina. Distant
objects (greater than 30 feet or 9 meters away from the eye) emit or reflect light that can be focused on the retina in a normal
relaxed eye (Figure 14.8).
Figure 14.8
The normal eye at rest can focus on the retina images
of objects more than 30 ft from the eye. When an
object is brought closer to the eye (i.e., less than 30 ft
from the eye), the light rays from the object take
more divergent paths and each enters the cornea
with a greater angle of incidence. Consequently, the
image focal point would be beyond the retina if the
eye's lens system were not adjusted. During
accommodation, the lens curvature increases,
increasing the refractive power of the eye and
focusing the image on the retina.
If a viewed object is brought closer to the eye, the light rays from the object diverge at a greater angle relative to the eye (Figure
14.8). Consequently, the nearer the object of view, the greater the angle of incidence of light rays on the cornea, and the greater
the refractive power required to focus the light rays on the retina. The cornea has a fixed refractive power (i.e. it cannot change its
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter14.html 6/20

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Eye and Retina (Section 2, Chapter 14) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
shape). However, altering the tension of the zonules on the elastic lens capsule can alter the lens shape. The change in the
refractive properties of the eye is called the accommodation or "near point" process.
In the normal eye under resting (distant vision) conditions, the ciliary muscles are relaxed and the zonules are under tension
(Figure 14.9). In this case, the lens is flattened, which reduces the refractive power of the lens to focus on distant objects. When an
object is closer to the eye (i.e., less than 30 ft. away), accommodation occurs to affect “near vision”. The ciliary muscle contracts,
pulling the ciliary processes toward the lens (remember the muscle acts as a sphincter). This action releases tension on the zonules
and the lens capsule. The reduced tension allows the lens to become more spherical (i.e., increase its curvature). The increase in
lens curvature increases the lens refractive power to focus on near objects. Consequently, as an object is moved closer to the
viewer, his eyes accommodate to increase the lens curvature, which increases the refractive power of his eye (Figure 14.8).
Figure 14.9
During distance vision (i.e., with the eye
at rest), the ciliary muscles are relaxed
and the zonules are under tension. The
lens is flattened by the tension on the
zonules and the lens capsule. However,
in the accommodation process, the ciliary
muscles contract and, acting like a
sphincter muscle, decrease the tension
on the zonules and lens capsule. The lens
becomes more spherical with its anterior
surface shifting more anteriorly into the
anterior chamber.
Refractive Errors of the Eye and Corrective Lenses
Presbyopia: In presbyopia, there is normal distance vision, but lens accommodation is reduced with age. With age, the lens loses
its elasticity and becomes a relatively solid mass. During accommodation, the lens is unable to assume a more spherical shape and
is unable to increase its refractive power for near vision (Figure 14.10). As a result, when an object is less than 30 ft. away from
the presbyopic viewer, the image is focused somewhere behind the retina.
Figure 14.10
In the presbyopic eye, when the object
is moved closer to the eye, the lens is
unable to accommodate and the image is
focused beyond the retina. For the
presbyopic eye a corrective lens that
converges the light rays (i.e., a convex
lens that reduces the angle of incidence
of light on the cornea) will allow the
presbyopic eye to view nearby objects.
A convex lens (i.e., increased refractive power) is used to correct the presbyopic eye (Figure 14.10). These lenses refract the light
rays so they strike the surface of the cornea at a smaller angle. However, because the corrective lens increases the refractive
power, the presbyope with convex lenses will have problems with distance vision. Consequently, the corrective lenses are often half
lenses (i.e., reading glasses) which allow the presbyope to view objects in the distance unimpeded by the convex lens.
Hyperopia: In hyperopia (Figure 14.11), the refractive power of the eye’s lens system is too weak or the eyeball too short. When
viewing distant objects, the image is focused at a point beyond the retina.
Figure 14.11
The hyperopic eye at
rest cannot focus on
the retina the image
of an object more than
30 ft from the eye.
The hyperopic lens
system is too weak
and the image is
focused beyond the
retina.
The young hyperope can compensate by using lens accommodation, i.e., increase the refractive power of the eye’s lens system
(Figure 14.12). We call the hyperope "far-sighted" (hypermetropic) because the power of accommodation used for distance vision
cannot be used for near vision.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter14.html 7/20

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Eye and Retina (Section 2, Chapter 14) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
Figure 14.12
If the hyperopia is
not severe; the
hyperopic eye can
use the lens
accommodation
process to increase
the refractive power
of the eye for
distance vision.
As the hyperope ages and becomes presbyopic, the power of accommodation is diminished. Consequently, the middle aged
hyperope may have a limited range (near and far) of vision. To correct this effect of aging, the refractive power of the eye is
increased with convex lenses (Figure 14.12).
Myopia: In myopia (Figure 14.13), the refractive power of the eye’s lens system is too strong or the eyeball too long. When
viewing distant objects, the image is focused at a point in front of retina.
Figure 14.13
The myopic eye at rest
cannot focus on the retina
the image of an object more
than 30 ft. from the eye.
The refractive power of the
eye's lens system is too
strong and the image is
focused in front of the
retina.
The uncorrected myopic eye is "near-sighted" because it can focus unaided on near objects. That is, the young myope will see
distant objects as blurred, poorly defined images but can see nearby small objects clearly (remember nearby objects emit divergent
light rays).
For distance vision, the refractive power of the myopic eye lens system is corrected with concave lenses that diverge the light rays
entering the eye (Figure 14.14). Note that as the power of accommodation diminishes with age, near vision is also affected in the
presbyopic-myopic eye. The mature myope may require bifocals, the upper half of the lens diverging light rays for distance vision
and the lower half with no or low converging power for near vision.
Figure 14.14
A corrective lens that
diverges light rays
before they enter the
eye (i.e., a concave
lens) will allow the
myopic eye to focus the
image of a distant
object on the retina.
Astigmatism: An astigmatism results when the cornea surface does not resemble the surface of a sphere (e.g. is more oblong). In
an eye with astigmatism, the image of distant and near objects cannot be focused on the retina (Figure 14.15). Astigmatism is
corrected with a cylindrical lens having a curvature that corrects for the corneal astigmatism. The cylindrical lens directs light waves
through the astigmatic cornea to focus a single, clear image on the retina.
Figure 14.15
The astigmatic lens
is asymmetrical and
has multiple focal
points, which
produces multiple
images of a point
source.
14.3 The Retina
You will now learn about the retinal neurons and the laminar structure of the retina, and the ways in which the light-sensitive
receptors of the eye convert the image projected onto the retina into neural responses. The light sensitive retina forms the
innermost layer of the eye (Figure 14.16).
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter14.html 8/20

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Eye and Retina (Section 2, Chapter 14) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
Figure 14.16
The eye, the three coats of the eye and the layers of
the retina. The retina is the innermost coat of the eye
and consists of the retinal pigment epithelium and
neural retina.
The retina covers the choroid and extends anteriorly to just behind the ciliary body. The retina consists of neurons and supporting
cells.
Components of the Retina
The retina is derived from the neural tube and is, therefore, part of central nervous system. It consists of two parts, the retinal
pigment epithelium, which separates the middle, choroid coat of the eyeball from the other innermost component and the neural
retina (Figure 14.16) – the dark pigments within the retinal pigment epithelium and choroid coat function to absorb light passing
through the receptor layer, thus reducing light scatter and image distortion within the eye. The neural retina contains five types of
neurons (Figure 14.17): the visual receptor cells (the rods and cones), the horizontal cells, the bipolar cells, the amacrine cells, and
the retinal ganglion cells.
Retinal Layers
The retina is a laminated structure consisting of alternating layers of cell bodies and cell processes (Figure 14.18).
Figure 14.17
The components of the neural
retina. The neural retina
consists of at least five different
types of neurons: the
photoreceptors (rods and
cones), horizontal cell, bipolar
cell, amacrine cell and ganglion
cell.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter14.html 9/20

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Eye and Retina (Section 2, Chapter 14) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
Figure 14.18
The neural retina is formed by
alternating layers of neuron cell
bodies that appear dark and
neuron processes that appear
light in Nissl stained tissue. The
receptor cells synapse with
bipolar and horizontal cells in
the outer plexiform layer. The
bipolar cells, in turn, synapse
with amacrine and ganglion
cells in the inner plexiform layer
The axons of the retinal
ganglion cells exit the eye to
form the optic nerve.
The innermost layers are located nearest the vitreous chamber, whereas the outermost layers are located adjacent to the retinal
pigment epithelium and choroid. The most important layers, progressing from the outer to inner layers, are:
the retinal pigment epithelium, which provides critical metabolic and supportive functions to the photoreceptors;
the receptor layer, which contains the light sensitive outer segments of the photoreceptors;
the outer nuclear layer, which contains the photoreceptor cell bodies;
the outer plexiform layer, where the photoreceptor, horizontal and bipolar cells synapse;
the inner nuclear layer, which contains the horizontal, bipolar and amacrine cell bodies;
the inner plexiform layer, where the bipolar, amacrine and retinal ganglion cells synapse;
the retinal ganglion cell layer, which contains the retinal ganglion cell bodies; and
the optic nerve layer, which contains the ganglion cell axons traveling to the optic disc.
Notice that light passing through the cornea, lens and vitreous must pass through most of the retinal layers before reaching the
light-sensitive portion of the photoreceptor; the outer segment in the receptor layer. Notice also that in the region of the fovea
where the image of the central visual field center is focused, the retina consists of fewer layers (Figure 14.19): thereby minimizing
the obstacles to forming a clear image on the fovea. The area around the fovea, the surrounding macula, is thicker because it
contains the cell bodies and processes of retinal neurons receiving information from the receptors in the fovea.
The optic disc is formed by the retinal ganglion cell axons that are exiting the retina. It is located nasal to the fovea (Figure 14.19).
This region of the retina is devoid of receptor cells and composed predominantly by the optic nerve layer. Consequently, it is the
structural basis for the 'blind spot" in the visual field.
Figure 14.19
The fovea of the
retina and the layers
of the retina in the
surrounding macula.
The fovea and macula
are colored as they
appear when stained
for Nissl substance,
which is most
abundant in the
neuron cell body.
The Photoreceptors
The human has two types of photoreceptors: the rods and cones (Figure 14.20). They are distinguished structurally by the
shapes of their outer segments. The photopigments of the rods and cones also differ. The rod outer segment disks contain the
photopigment rhodopsin, which absorbs a wide bandwidth of light. The cones differ in the color of light their photopigments
absorbs: one type of photopigment absorbs red light, another green light, and a third blue light. As each cone receptor contains
only one of the three types of cone photopigment, there are three types of cones; red, green or blue. Each cone responds best to a
specific color of light, whereas the rods respond best to white light2. The rod and cone photopigments also differ in illumination
sensitivity; rhodopsin breaks down at lower light levels than that required to breakdown cone photopigments. Consequently, the
rods are more sensitive - at least at low levels of illumination.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter14.html 10/20

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Eye and Retina (Section 2, Chapter 14) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
14.4 Rods and Cones Form the Basis for Scotopic and Photopic Vision
The human visual system has two subsystems that operate at different light energy levels. The scotopic, dark-adapted system
operates at low levels of illumination, whereas the photopic, light-adapted system operates at high levels of illumination.
Figure 14.20
The cone and rod photoreceptors.
The photoreceptors are neurons
that have a dendritic component
(the outer segment) and an
axonal component that forms
synaptic terminals.
Rods are responsible for the initiation of the scotopic visual process. Rods
contain the photopigment rhodopsin, which breaks down when exposed to a wide bandwidth of light (i.e., it is achromatic).
Rhodopsin is also more sensitive to light and reacts at lower light levels than the color sensitive (chromatic) cone
pigments.
have longer outer segments, more outer segment disks and, consequently, contain more photopigment.
are more sensitive to light and function at scotopic (low) levels of illumination.
dominate in the peripheral retina (Figure 14.21A), which is color insensitive, has poor acuity (Figure 14.21B), but is sensitive
to low levels of illumination.
Cones are responsible for the initiation of the photopic visual process. Cones
contain photopigments that breakdown in the presence of a limited bandwidth of light (i.e., cone photopigments are
chromatic).
are color sensitive.
are less sensitive to light and require high (daylight) illumination levels.
are concentrated in the fovea (Figure 14.21A)
in the fovea have image of the central visual field projected on them.
in the fovea are responsible for photopic, light-adapted vision (i.e., high visual acuity and color vision) in the central visual
field (Figure 14.21B)
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter14.html 11/20

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Eye and Retina (Section 2, Chapter 14) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
Figure 14.21
The rods, are taller, have longer outer
segments and, consequently, contain
more outer segment disks and more
photopigment than cones. Cone
receptors are concentrated in the fovea
of the eye (at 0° eccentricity), whereas
rod receptors are concentrated in more
peripheral retina (A). Visual acuity is
maximal in the central area of the
visual field (at 0° eccentricity),
whereas it is minimal in more
peripheral areas (B). Notice that the
location of the optic disc relative to the
fovea corresponds to the location of the
blind spot relative to the visual field
center.
Biochemical processes in the photoreceptors participate in dark and light adaptation. Notice when you enter a darkened room after
spending time in daylight, it takes many minutes before you are able to see objects in the dim light. This slow increase in light
sensitivity is called the dark-adaptation process and is related to the rate of regeneration of photopigments and to the intracellular
concentration of calcium3. A contrasting, but faster, process occurs in high levels of illumination. When you are fully dark-adapted,
exposure to bright light is at first blinding (massive photopigment breakdown and stimulation of photoreceptors) and is followed
rapidly by a return of sight. This phenomenon, light adaptation, allows the cone response to dominate over rod responses at high
illumination.
14.5 Visual Processing in the Retina
The photoreceptors exhibit a fairly high basal release of glutamate. When light strikes the photoreceptor cell, it initiates a
biochemical process in the cell that reduces the release of glutamate from its axon terminal. The glutamate, in turn, affects the
activity of the bipolar and horizontal cells, which synapse with the photoreceptor. The bipolar cells, in turn, synapse with amacrine
and retinal ganglion cells. It is the axons of the retinal ganglion cells that exit the eye as the optic nerve and terminate in the brain.
Notice that the direct pathway for the transmission of visual information from the eye to the brain includes only the receptor cell,
bipolar cell and ganglion cell. The horizontal cells modulate the synaptic activity of receptor cells and, thereby, indirectly affect the
transmission of visual information by bipolar cells. Similarly the amacrine cells modulate the synaptic activity of the retinal bipolar
and ganglion cells, thereby affecting the transmission of visual information by the ganglion cells.
Bipolar Cells
Within the outer plexiform layer of the retina, approximately 125 million photoreceptor cells synapse with approximately 10 million
bipolar cells. A smaller number of horizontal cells also synapse with the photoreceptor cells within the outer plexiform layer of the
retina. The bipolar and horizontal cells respond to the glutamate released by the photoreceptor cells4.
Bipolar cells
do not generate action potentials.
respond to the release of glutamate from photoreceptors with graded potentials (i.e., by hyperpolarizing or
depolarizing).
Bipolar cells differ based on their responses to photoreceptor stimulation.
There are at least two types of bipolar cells based on their responses to glutamate.
The off bipolar cells are depolarized by glutamate.
The on bipolar cells are hyperpolarized by glutamate.
The two bipolar cell types have different functional properties.
The off bipolar cells function to detect dark objects in a lighter background.
The on bipolar cells function to detect light objects in a darker background.
The stimulus condition that produces a depolarizing response from a bipolar cell is used to name the bipolar cell type.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter14.html 12/20

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Eye and Retina (Section 2, Chapter 14) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
An off bipolar cell depolarizes when the photoreceptors that synapse with it are in the dark (i.e., when the light is off, Figure
14.22).
An on bipolar cell depolarizes when the photoreceptors that synapse with are in the light (i.e., when the light is on, Figure
14.22). Note that the depolarization of the on bipolar cell does not result from excitation of the presynaptic cell but rather
from a reduction of the inhibitory action of glutamate produced by the light-induced decreased release of glutamate from the
photoreceptor.
Figure 14.22
When the receptor cells with
which an off bipolar cell synapses
are in the dark, the off bipolar
cell is depolarized and the on
bipolar cell is hyperpolarized. In
contrast, when the receptor cells
with which an off bipolar cell
synapses are in the light, the off
bipolar cell is hyperpolarized and
the on bipolar cell is depolarized.
Bipolar Cell Receptive Field: The receptive field of a bipolar cell is defined anatomically by the location and distribution of
receptor cells with which it makes synaptic contact.
Each cone bipolar cell makes direct synaptic contact with a circumscribed patch of cone receptors, which may be as few as
one foveal cone. Consequently, the receptive fields of bipolar cells synapsing with cones in the fovea are extremely small and
are color sensitive. The cone bipolars may be hyperpolarized or depolarized by glutamate and, consequently, may be on-type
or off-type bipolar cells.
Each rod bipolar cell may make synaptic contact with a few to fifty or more of rod receptor cells. Consequently, the rod
bipolar cell receptive field is relatively large and color insensitive. All rod bipolar cells are hyperpolarized by glutamate and,
consequently, are on-type bipolar cells exclusively.
The bipolar cell receptive field is also defined physiologically as the retinal area which when exposed to light produces a response
(i.e., depolarization or hyperpolarization) in the bipolar cell.
Bipolar cells have concentric receptive fields. Light directed on the photoreceptor(s) that synapse with a bipolar cell produces a
response from the bipolar cell called the center response (Figure 14.23). In contrast, light directed on immediately surrounding
receptors produce the opposite response (Figure 14.24).
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter14.html 13/20

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Eye and Retina (Section 2, Chapter 14) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
Figure 14.23 Figure 14.24
Bipolar cells have concentric receptive fields. Bipolar cells have concentric receptive fields.
The on bipolar cell depolarizes when the When the receptors surrounding the center
receptor cells with which it synapses are receptors of the on bipolar receptive field are
illuminated ("Light On"). These center illuminated ("Light On") and the center
receptors (i.e., the ones making direct receptors kept in the dark, the on bipolar cell
synaptic contact with the bipolar cell) is hyperpolarized.
produce the bipolar cell center response.
When both the center and surrounding receptor cells are illuminated with light, the on bipolar cell response to stimulation of the
center receptors is reduced by stimulation of the surround receptors (Figure 14.25).
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter14.html 14/20

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Eye and Retina (Section 2, Chapter 14) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
Figure 14.25
Bipolar cells have concentric
receptive fields. When both the
center and surrounding receptors of
the on bipolar cell receptive field are
illuminated, the on bipolar cell
depolarizes. However, the magnitude
of the depolarization is reduced to
less than the depolarization to
illumination of only the center
receptors.
Consequently, the strongest on bipolar cell response is produced when the stimulus is a light spot encircled by a dark ring. For the
off bipolar cell, a dark spot encircled by a light ring produces maximal depolarization.
Horizontal Cells
Within the outer plexiform layer, the photoreceptor cells make both presynaptic and postsynaptic contact with horizontal cells.
The horizontal cells have large receptive fields involving
presynaptic (axonal) contact with a small group of photoreceptors and
postsynaptic (dendritic) contact with a larger group of surrounding photoreceptor cells.
By controlling the responses of their “center” photoreceptors (based on the responses of the surrounding photoreceptors), the
horizontal cells indirectly produce the bipolar cell receptive field surround effect. The surround effect produced by the horizontal cell
is weaker than the center effect.
Figure 14.26
The horizontal cells make presynaptic and
postsynaptic contact with photoreceptor cells.
The axon terminals of a horizontal cell receives
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter14.html 15/20

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Eye and Retina (Section 2, Chapter 14) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
synaptic contact from one group of
photoreceptors (colored red) and its processes
make synaptic contact with surrounding
photoreceptor cells (colored green).
The surround effect, produced by the horizontal cells, enhances brightness contrasts to produce sharper images, to make an object
appear brighter or darker depending on the background and to maintain these contrasts under different illumination levels.
Retinal Ganglion Cells
Within the inner plexiform layer, the axon terminals of bipolar cells (the 2° visual afferents) synapse on the dendritic processes of
amacrine cells and ganglion cells. As in most neurons, depolarization results in neurotransmitter release by the bipolar cell at its
axon terminals. Most bipolar cells release glutamate, which is excitatory to most ganglion cells (i.e., depolarizes ganglion cells). The
amacrine cells may synapse with bipolar cells, other amacrine cells or ganglion cells. It is the axons of the retinal ganglion cells (the
3° visual afferents) that exit the eye to form the optic nerve and deliver visual information to the lateral geniculate nucleus of the
thalamus and to other diencephalic and midbrain structures.
Figure 14.27
An off ganglion cell synapses with an off bipolar cell and
produces action potentials (i.e., is excited) when the off
bipolar cell is depolarized (i.e., when the light is off). In
contrast, an on ganglion cell that synapses with an on
bipolar cell reduces the rate at which it produces action
potentials (i.e., is inhibited) when the on bipolar cell is
hyperpolarized (when the light is off).
Ganglion Cell Response Properties. The retinal ganglion cells are the final retinal elements in the direct pathway from the eye to
the brain. Because they must carry visual information some distance from the eye, they posses voltage-gated sodium channels in
their axonal membranes and generate action potentials when they are depolarized by the glutamate released by the bipolar cells.
The off bipolar cell (Figure 14.27, Right) will depolarize when it is dark on its center cones and will therefore release glutamate
when it is dark on the center of its receptive field. This will result in the depolarization of the retinal ganglion cells with which the off
bipolar synapses and in the production of action potentials (i.e., discharges) by these ganglion cells (Figure 14.27, Right).
Consequently, the retinal ganglion cells that synapse with off bipolar cells will have off-center/on-surround receptive fields and are
called off ganglion cells.
The on bipolar cell (Figure 14.28, Left) will depolarize when there is light on its center cones and will therefore release glutamate
when it is light on the center of its receptive field. This will result in the depolarization of the retinal ganglion cells with which the on
bipolar synapses and in the production of action potentials (i.e., discharges) by these ganglion cells (Figure 14.28, Left).
Consequently, the retinal ganglion cells that synapse with on bipolar cells will have on-center/off-surround receptive fields and are
called on ganglion cells.
In short, the receptive fields of the bipolar cells with which the retinal ganglion cell synapses determine the receptive field
configuration of a retinal ganglion cell.
The retinal ganglion cells provide information important for detecting the shape and movement of objects.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter14.html 16/20

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Eye and Retina (Section 2, Chapter 14) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
In the primate eye, there are two major types of retinal ganglion cells, Type M and Type P cells, that process information about
different stimulus properties.
Figure 14.28
Left: The on ganglion cell synapses with an on bipolar cell
and produces action potentials (i.e., is excited) when the on
bipolar cell is depolarized (i.e., when the light is on). Right:
In contrast, an off ganglion cell that synapses with an off
bipolar cell reduces the rate at which it produces action
potentials (i.e., is inhibited) when the off bipolar cell is
hyperpolarized (when the light is on).
Type P retinal ganglion cells are color-sensitive object detectors.
The P ganglion cell(s)
outnumber the M-ganglion cells, by approximately 100 to 1 in the primate retina
makes synaptic contact with one to a few cone bipolars that are innervated by cone receptors in the macula fovea
is color sensitive
has a small concentric receptive field
produces a sustained, slowly adapting response that lasts as long as a stimulus is centered on its receptive field.
produces weak responses to stimuli that move across its receptive field.
The slowly adapting response of the Type P retinal ganglion cell is best suited for signaling the presence, color and duration of a
visual stimulus and is poor for signaling stimulus movement.
Type M retinal ganglion cells are color-insensitive motion detectors.
The M ganglion cell
is much larger than P ganglion cells
synapses with many bipolar cells
is color insensitive
has a large concentric receptive field
is more sensitive to small center-surround brightness differences
responds with a transient, rapidly adapting response to a maintained stimulus.
responds maximally, with high discharge rates, to stimuli moving across its receptive field.
The rapidly adapting responses of Type M ganglion cells are best suited for signaling temporal variations in, and the movement of, a
stimulus.
The axons of the M and P retinal ganglion cells travel in the retina optic nerve fiber layer to the optic disc where they exit the eye.
Most of the axons travel to and terminate in the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus.
Amacrine Cells
Amacrine cells synapse with bipolar cells and ganglion cells and are similar to horizontal cells in providing lateral connections
between similar types of neurons (e.g., they may connect bipolar cells to other bipolar cells)5. They differ from horizontal cells,
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter14.html 17/20

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Eye and Retina (Section 2, Chapter 14) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
however, in also providing ‘’vertical” links between bipolar and ganglion cells.
Amacrine cell types. There are 20 or more types of amacrine cells based on their morphology and neurochemistry. The roles of
three types have been identified. One type
is responsible for producing the movement sensitive (rapidly adapting) response of the Type M ganglion cells.
enhances the center-surround effect in ganglion cell receptive fields.
connects rod bipolar cells to cone bipolar cells, thus allowing ganglion cells to respond to the entire range of light levels, from
scotopic to photopic.
Convergence of Inputs and Visual Acuity
Low convergence of cones to cone bipolar cells and low convergence of cone bipolar cells to P-retinal ganglion cells produce high
visual acuity in the central visual field.
Recall that
visual acuity and color vision are greatest in the central visual field.
the image of the central visual field is projected onto the fovea.
the cones are concentrated in the fovea, whereas the rods predominate in the peripheral retina.
there is low convergence of foveal cones onto macular bipolar cells, as low as one cone receptor to one bipolar cell.
In addition, the cones in the fovea are of smaller diameter than those in the periphery of the retina, which allows for a greater
packing density of foveal cones. The high packing density of cones and the low convergence of cones onto bipolar cells in the
macula support higher visual acuity in the central visual field. Consequently, the foveal cones, macular bipolar cells and the P-
retinal ganglion cells are responsible for photopic, light-adapted vision in the central visual field. In contrast, the higher
convergence of the rods onto peripherally located bipolar cells and of peripheral bipolar cells onto amacrine cells forms the basis for
the poor visual acuity but high light sensitivity of scotopic vision.
14.5 Clinical Manifestations of Retinal Dysfunction
The chemical and physical integrity of the retina is essential for normal visual function. Abnormalities in the blood supply and retinal
pigment epithelium result in retinal dysfunctions.
Vitamin A deficiency can cause permanent blindness. An adequate supply of photopigments is necessary to sustain
photoreceptors. The supply of all-trans retinal as a photopigment breakdown product is insufficient to maintain adequate
photopigment production. Vitamin A can be oxidized into all-trans retinal, and is, therefore, critical in the synthesis of
photopigment. In the eye, it is the retinal pigment epithelium that stores vitamin A. The retinal pigment epithelium is also the site
of the oxidization of vitamin A into all-trans retinal and conversion of all-trans retinal into 11-cis-retinal. Vitamin A cannot be
synthesized by the body and must be ingested. It is found in blood and stored in the liver and retinal pigment epithelium. Vitamin A
deficiency, which can result from liver damage (e.g., from alcoholism or hepatitis), produces degeneration of photoreceptors with
visual symptoms first presenting as “night blindness” (i.e., extremely poor vision under low illumination).
Retinitis pigmentosa is an inherited disorder in which there is a gradual and progressive failure to maintain the receptor cells.
One form involves the production of defective opsin that normally combines with 11-cis retinal to form rhodopsin. Consequently, the
rods do not contain sufficient rhodopsin and do not function as the low illumination receptors. A symptom of this condition is “night
blindness” and loss of peripheral vision. In this form of retinitis pigmentosa, the cones receptors function normally and central
vision remains intact. Other forms of retinitis pigmentosa that affect the cones may progress to destroy central vision.
Macular Degeneration. The leading cause of blindness in the elderly is age-related macular degeneration. The dry form of
macular degeneration involves intraocular proliferation of cells in the macular area (i.e., in the fovea and the immediately
surrounding retinal areas). In the wet form of macular degeneration, the capillaries of the choroid coat invade the macular area and
destroy receptor cells and neurons. In both forms, the visual loss is in the central visual field and the patient will complain of
blurred vision and difficulty reading. Laser surgery is the most common treatment for the wet form but has the disadvantage of
destroying normal retinal cells. It also may not be effective in preventing cell proliferation following treatment.
Retinal detachment. When the neural retina is torn away from the retinal pigment epithelium (e.g., by a blow to the eye), there is
a loss of vision in the area of detachment. The loss of vision results because the neural retina is dependent on the retinal pigment
epithelium for 11-cis retinal, nutrients and photoreceptor integrity. The retinal pigment epithelium supplies glucose and essential
ions to the neural retina, helps support the photoreceptor cell outer segment, removes outer segment disks shed by the receptor
cells, and converts retinol and stores vitamin A for photopigment resynthesis. Lasers may be used to weld the detachment to
prevent it from increasing in size. However, the detached and welded areas are functionally blind.
Diabetic retinopathy. The pathological process in diabetic retinopathy involves microaneurysms and punctate hemorrhages in the
retina. The tiny swollen blood vessels and/or bleeding in the underlying choroid coat damage the receptor cells and retinal neurons
and result in blindness in the regions affected. Lasers may be used to seal swollen and/or leaking blood vessels.
14.6 Summary
This chapter described the stimulus (light) properties that are important for the visual perception of our external environment, such
as color, brightness, color and brightness contrasts (for form perception and visual acuity), visual field representation, binocular
fusion and depth perception. Remember that there are regional differences in visual perception: the central visual field is color-
sensitive, has high acuity vision and operates at high levels of illumination (i.e., operates with the photopic, light-adapted
subsystem). In contrast, the visual field periphery is more sensitive at low levels of illumination, is relatively color insensitive and
has poor visual acuity (i.e., operates with the scotopic, dark-adapted, subsystem). The chapter also described how the lens system
of the eye produces an image on the retina of light emitted by or reflected off objects in space. The image is a smaller, inverted,
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter14.html 18/20

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Eye and Retina (Section 2, Chapter 14) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
and reversed picture of the object. Keep in mind that the image projected onto the retina is, in fact, projected onto a flattened
sheet of receptor cells that line the inner surface of the eye. The following chapter will describe the function of the visual receptors
and other retinal neurons in converting the visual image into an array of neural activity.
The chapter also reviewed the retinal neurons and the laminar structure of the retina. The image projected onto the retina is
distributed over a mosaic of photoreceptors. Light energy projected onto each photoreceptor is converted into receptor membrane
potential changes by a process that involves photosensitive pigments and cyclic nucleotide-gated ion channels in the photoreceptor
outer segment. The phototransduction process converts light energy into photoreceptor membrane potential changes that produce
a chemical signal (the release of glutamate), which results in membrane potential changes in the postsynaptic bipolar and
horizontal cells. The receptor substrate for scotopic and photopic vision lies in differences between the rod and cone receptors.
In the primate eye, the information gathered by 125 million receptor cells converges on 10 million bipolar cells, which, in turn,
converge on 1 million retinal ganglion cells. The degree of convergence from receptors to bipolar cell and bipolar cells to ganglion
cell differs regionally within the retina. In the peripheral retina, the convergence can be fifty or more rod receptors to one bipolar
cell, which increases the sensitivity to dim lights but decreases the spatial acuity of the peripheral bipolar cell. In addition, these
peripheral bipolar cells are color insensitive. The M-ganglion cells receive input from many peripheral bipolar cells, have large
receptive fields, are sensitive to small brightness contrasts and are color insensitive. They also generate transient responses and
are uniquely sensitive to changes in illumination levels and movement. In contrast, the bipolar cells in the macula synapse with few
foveal cone receptors, which maintain the spatial resolution of the densely packed cones. Such macular bipolar cells have small
receptive field centers, are color sensitive but must operate at high illumination levels. Each P-ganglion cell synapses with few
macular bipolar cells and is color sensitive, but less sensitive to dim “white” light and to small brightness contrasts. The P ganglion
cells have smaller receptive fields than the M ganglion cells and respond with sustained discharges to maintained stimuli. As the M
ganglion cells and P ganglion cells respond to different aspects of the visual stimulus, they are described to be encoding and
carrying independent, parallel, streams (M-stream and P-stream) of information about stimulus size, color, and movement.
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
All of the following is characteristic of the cornea of the eye EXCEPT:
A. Cataracts are formed when it is damaged.
B. It is devoid of blood vessels.
C. It receives oxygen from the tear film
D. Nutrients are provided by the aqueous humor
E. Its refractive power is fixed for distance vision
Question 2 A B C D
Which of the following account for the ability of rod bipolar cells to detect and signal light at lower
illumination levels than cone bipolar cells?
A. Rods are more concentrated in the fovea than the cones.
B. The rod bipolar cells projections are denser than the cone bipolar cells projections.
C. Rods have thicker outer segments than the cones.
D. Photopigments in rods are broken down by the narrowest bandwidth of light.
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter14.html 19/20

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Visual Processing: Eye and Retina (Section 2, Chapter 14) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | D…
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter14.html 20/20



1/7/25, 10:05 AM Auditory System: Pathways and Reflexes (Section 2, Chapter 13) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscienc…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 2: Sensory Systems
Search
Chapter 13: Auditory System: Pathways and Reflexes
Lincoln Gray, Ph.D., Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, James Madison University
Reviewed and revised 07 Oct 2020
13.1 Connections in the Central Auditory System
Cochlear Nucleus, Superior Olive, Lateral Lemniscus, Inferior Colliculus, Medical Geniculate, Superior
Temporal Gyrus
Connections in the central auditory system are complex, but a simple summary is that information proceeds from the Organ of
Corti to spiral ganglion cells and the VIIIth nerve afferents in the ear, to the cochlear nuclei, many crossing in the trapezoid body
to the superior olive in the brain stem. Then all ascending fibers stop in the inferior colliculus in the midbrain and the medial
geniculate body in the thalamus, before reaching the cortex in the superior temporal gyrus. All auditory afferents synapse in the
cochlear nuclei and in the thalamus. Beyond that simplification, second order fibers from the cochlear nuclei proceed rostrally in
several different pathways. Afferents are generally distributed bilaterally so unilateral damage at any level does not usually result in
deafness in either ear.
Figure 13.1
Fast-acting auditory afferents through dorsal cochlear
nucleus. Press PLAY to activate the animation. Then, click on
the cochlea and text to gain further information.
Figure 13.1 shows a fiber traveling somewhat directly from the cochlea to the cortex. This is a fast acting system. These fibers
synapse in the dorsal cochlear nucleus, and may function as a general warning (as when you might jump from a loud sound). These
fibers decussate and ascend in the lateral lemniscus to the inferior colliculus.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter13.html 1/4

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Auditory System: Pathways and Reflexes (Section 2, Chapter 13) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscienc…
Figure 13.2
Ascending pathway for most auditory afferents. Press PLAY
to activate the animation. Then, click on the cochlea and text
to gain further information.
Figure 13.2 shows the more numerous connections that work their way rostrally through a more detailed pathway. This slow acting
system involves much more processing and may provide more detailed information about the sound, such as its location. These
fibers synapse in the ventral cochlear nucleus. Fibers from the ventral cochlear nucleus synapse in the ipsilateral and contralateral
superior olivary nucleus. Some fibers from the ventral cochlear nucleus cross the midline in the trapezoid body. Thus, cells in the
superior olive receive inputs from both ears and are the first place in the central auditory system where binaural processing (stereo
hearing) is possible. The output of the superior olive travels in the lateral lemniscus. Some nuclei within the lateral lemniscus
further process the sound. Most of these afferents synapse in the inferior colliculus. All afferents then synapse in the medial
geniculate body of the thalamus. Thalamic afferents reach the superior temporal gyrus through the sub-lenticular portion of the
internal capsule.
Figure 13.3
Binaural auditory afferents. Press PLAY to activate the animation. Then,
click on the cochlea and text to gain further information.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter13.html 2/4

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Auditory System: Pathways and Reflexes (Section 2, Chapter 13) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscienc…
Figure 13.3 shows the same detail processing system as in Figure 13.2, only now with the more realistic situation of input from
both ears. The two different patterns of dashed lines combine to form a solid line above the superior olive, meant to indicate the
combination of monaural inputs into bilateral and binaural activation.
Primary auditory cortex, or Herschel’s gyrus in insular cortex, is tonotopically organized. Afferents from this longitudinal strip
on the superior temporal gyrus diverge to a wide variety of other cortical processing areas, including Wernicke’s area in the
parietal lobe where speech is processed.
Auditory afferents are tonotopically organized from the ear to the cortex. This starts with high frequencies transduced at the base
of the cochlea, and low frequencies transduced at the apex (see Figure 12.7). Click on the cochlea in Figure 13.3 to see the color
code of pitch, as if the cochlea were a piano. Low frequency fibers then pass in the central core of the VIIth nerve surrounded by
high frequency fibers (see Auditory System: Structure and Function). This segregation of high and low frequencies persists
throughout the CNS. As seen in Figure 13.3, low frequencies are more lateral in primary auditory cortex.
The video below by Sarah Baum, Heather Turner, Nadeeka Dias, Deepna Thakkar, Natalie Sirisaengtaksin and Jonathan Flynn
further explains the structures, functions and pathways of the auditory system in "The Journey of Sound".
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
Afferent activity in the central auditory system generally proceeds through the following areas.
Which is THIRD in the sequence?
A. cochlear nucleus
B. inferior colliculus
C. medial geniculate
D. superior olivary nucleus
E. superior temporal gyrus
Question 2 A B C D E
Auditory afferents travel through the midbrain in the
A. medial lemniscus
B. lateral lemniscus
C. medial longitudinal fasciculus
D. trapezoid body
E. sublenticular portion of the internal capsule
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter13.html 3/4

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Auditory System: Pathways and Reflexes (Section 2, Chapter 13) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscienc…
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter13.html 4/4



1/7/25, 10:05 AM Auditory System: Structure and Function (Section 2, Chapter 12) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscienc…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 2: Sensory Systems
Search
Chapter 12: Auditory System: Structure and Function
Lincoln Gray, Ph.D., Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, James Madison University
Reviewed and revised 07 Oct 2020
12.1 The Vertebrate Hair Cell: Mechanoreceptor Mechanism, Tip Links, K+ and Ca2+
Channels
Figure 12.1
Mechanical Transduction in Hair Cells.
The key structure in the vertebrate auditory and vestibular systems is the hair cell. The hair cell first appeared in fish as part of a
long, thin array along the side of the body, sensing movements in the water. In higher vertebrates the internal fluid of the inner ear
(not external fluid as in fish) bathes the hair cells, but these cells still sense movements in the surrounding fluid. Several
specializations make human hair cells responsive to various forms of mechanical stimulation. Hair cells in the Organ of Corti in the
cochlea of the ear respond to sound. Hair cells in the cristae ampullares in the semicircular ducts respond to angular acceleration
(rotation of the head). Hair cells in the maculae of the saccule and the utricle respond to linear acceleration (gravity). (See the
chapter on Vestibular System: Structure and Function). The fluid, termed endolymph, which surrounds the hair cells is rich in
potassium. This actively maintained ionic imbalance provides an energy store, which is used to trigger neural action potentials when
the hair cells are moved. Tight junctions between hair cells and the nearby supporting cells form a barrier between endolymph and
perilymph that maintains the ionic imbalance.
Figure 12.1 illustrates the process of mechanical transduction at the tips of the hair cell cilia. Cilia emerge from the apical surface
of hair cells. These cilia increase in length along a consistent axis. There are tiny thread-like connections from the tip of each cilium
to a non-specific cation channel on the side of the taller neighboring cilium. The tip links function like a string connected to a hinged
hatch. When the cilia are bent toward the tallest one, the channels are opened, much like a trap door. Opening these channels
allows an influx of potassium, which in turns opens calcium channels that initiates the receptor potential. This mechanism
transduces mechanical energy into neural impulses. An inward K+ current depolarizes the cell, and opens voltage-dependent
calcium channels. This in turn causes neurotransmitter release at the basal end of the hair cell, eliciting an action potential in the
dendrites of the VIIIth cranial nerve.
Press the "play" button to see the mechanical-to-electrical transduction. Hair cells normally have a small influx of K+ at rest, so
there is some baseline activity in the afferent neurons. Bending the cilia toward the tallest one opens the potassium channels and
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter12.html 1/7

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Auditory System: Structure and Function (Section 2, Chapter 12) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscienc…
increases afferent activity. Bending the cilia in the opposite direction closes the channels and decreases afferent activity. Bending
the cilia to the side has no effect on spontaneous neural activity.
12.2 Sound: Intensity, Frequency, Outer and Middle Ear Mechanisms, Impedance Matching
by Area and Lever Ratios
The auditory system changes a wide range of weak mechanical signals into a complex series of electrical signals in the central
nervous system. Sound is a series of pressure changes in the air. Sounds often vary in frequency and intensity over time. Humans
can detect sounds that cause movements only slightly greater than those of Brownian movement. Obviously, if we heard that
ceaseless (except at absolute zero) motion of air molecules we would have no silence.
Figure 12.2
Air-conducted sounds eventually move the inner-ear fluid.
Figure 12.2 depicts these alternating compression and rarefaction (pressure) waves impinging on the ear. The pinna and external
auditory meatus collect these waves, change them slightly, and direct them to the tympanic membrane. The resulting movements
of the eardrum are transmitted through the three middle-ear ossicles (malleus, incus and stapes) to the fluid of the inner ear.
The footplate of the stapes fits tightly into the oval window of the bony cochlea. The inner ear is filled with fluid. Since fluid is
incompressible, as the stapes moves in and out there needs to be a compensatory movement in the opposite direction. Notice that
the round window membrane, located beneath the oval window, moves in the opposite direction.
Because the tympanic membrane has a larger area than the stapes footplate there is a hydraulic amplification of the sound
pressure. Also because the arm of the malleus to which the tympanic membrane is attached is longer than the arm of the incus to
which the stapes is attached, there is a slight amplification of the sound pressure by a lever action. These two impedance matching
mechanisms effectively transmit air-born sound into the fluid of the inner ear. If the middle-ear apparatus (ear drum and
ossicles) were absent, then sound reaching the oval and round windows would be largely reflected.
12.3 The Cochlea: three scalae, basilar membrane, movement of hair cells
Figure 12.3
Cross-section of the coiled Cochlea.
The cochlea is a long coiled tube, with three channels divided by two thin membranes. The top tube is the scala vestibuli, which is
connected to the oval window. The bottom tube is the scala tympani, which is connected to the round window. The middle tube is
the scala media, which contains the Organ of Corti. The Organ of Corti sits on the basilar membrane, which forms the division
between the scalae media and tympani.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter12.html 2/7

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Auditory System: Structure and Function (Section 2, Chapter 12) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscienc…
Figure 12.3 illustrates a cross section through the cochlea. The three scalae (vestibuli, media, tympani) are cut in several places as
they spiral around a central core. The cochlea makes 2-1/2 turns in the human (hence the 5 cuts in midline cross section). The
tightly coiled shape gives the cochlea its name, which means snail in Greek (as in conch shell). As explained in Tonotopic
Organization, high frequency sounds stimulate the base of the cochlea, whereas low frequency sounds stimulate the apex. This
feature is depicted in the animation of Figure 12.3 with neural impulses (having colors from red to blue representing low to high
frequencies, respectively) emerging from different turns of the cochlea. The activity in Figure 12.3 would be generated by white
noise that has all frequencies at equal amplitudes. The moving dots are meant to indicate afferent action potentials. Low
frequencies are transduced at the apex of the cochlea and are represented by red dots. High frequencies are transduced at base of
the cochlea and are represented by blue dots. A consequence of this arrangement is that low frequencies are found in the central
core of the cochlear nerve, with high frequencies on the outside.
Figure 12.4
Detailed cross-section of one turn of the
Cochlear duct.
Figure 12.4 illustrates one cross section of the cochlea. Sound waves cause the oval and round windows at the base of the cochlea
to move in opposite directions (See Figure 12.2). This causes the basilar membrane to be displaced and starts a traveling wave that
sweeps from the base toward the apex of the cochlea (See Figure 12.7). The traveling wave increases in amplitude as it moves, and
reaches a peak at a place that is directly related to the frequency of the sound. The illustration shows a section of the cochlea that
is moving in response to sound.
Figure 12.5 illustrates a higher magnification of the Organ of Corti. The traveling wave causes the basilar membrane and hence the
Organ of Corti to move up and down. The organ of Corti has a central stiffening buttress formed by paired pillar cells. Hair cells
protrude from the top of the Organ of Corti. A tectorial (roof) membrane is held in place by a hinge-like mechanism on the side of
the Organ of Corti and floats above the hair cells. As the basilar and tectorial membranes move up and down with the traveling
wave, the hinge mechanism causes the tectorial membrane to move laterally over the hair cells. This lateral shearing motion bends
the cilia atop the hair cells, pulls on the fine tip links, and opens the trap-door channels (See Figure 12.1). The influx of potassium
and then calcium causes neurotransmitter release, which in turn causes an EPSP that initiates action potentials in the afferents of
the VIIIth cranial nerve. Most of the afferent dendrites make synaptic contacts with the inner hair cells.
Figure 12.5
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter12.html 3/7

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Auditory System: Structure and Function (Section 2, Chapter 12) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscienc…
Figure 12.6 looks down on the Organ of Corti. There are two types of hair cells, inner and outer. There is one row of inner hair
cells and three rows of outer hair cells. Most of the afferent dendrites synapse on inner hair cells. Most of efferent axons synapse on
the outer hair cells. The outer hair cells are active. They move in response to sound and amplify the traveling wave. The outer hair
cells also produce sounds that can be detected in the external auditory meatus with sensitive microphones. These internally
generated sounds, termed otoacoustic emissions, are now used to screen newborns for hearing loss. Figure 12.6 shows an
immunofluorescent whole mount image of a neonatal mouse cochlea showing the three rows of outer hair cells and the single row
of inner hair cells. The mature human cochlea would look approximately the same. Superimposed schematically-depicted neurons
show the typical pattern of afferent connections. Ninety-five percent of the VIIIth nerve afferents synapse on inner hair cells. Each
inner hair cell makes synaptic connections with many afferents. Each afferent connects to only one inner hair cell. About five
percent of the afferents synapse on outer hair cells. These afferents travel a considerable distance along the basilar membrane
away from their ganglion cells to synapse on multiple outer hair cells. Less than one percent (~0.5%) of the afferents synapse on
multiple inner hair cells. The below micrograph is courtesy of Dr. Douglas Cotanche, Department of Otolaryngology, Children's
Hospital of Boston, Harvard Medical School. Reprinted with permission.
Figure 12.6
Hair cells on the mammalian basilar membrane.
12.4 Tonotopic Organization
0Hz
Figure 12.7
Tonotopic organization of the mature human Cochlea.
Physical characteristics of the basilar membrane cause different frequencies to reach maximum amplitudes at different positions.
Much as on a piano, high frequencies are at one end and low frequencies at the other. High frequencies are transduced at the base
of the cochlea whereas low frequencies are transduced at the apex. Figure 12.7 illustrates the way in which the cochlea acts as a
frequency analyzer. The cochlea codes the pitch of a sound by the place of maximal vibration. Note the position of the traveling
wave at different frequencies. (Beware! It may initially seem backwards that low frequencies are not associated with the base.)
Select different frequencies by turning the dial. If audio on your computer is enabled, you will hear the sound you selected. Hearing
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter12.html 4/7

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Auditory System: Structure and Function (Section 2, Chapter 12) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscienc…
loss at high frequencies is common. The average loss of hearing in American males is about a cycle per second per day (starting at
about age 20, so a 50-year old would likely have difficulty hearing over 10 kHz). If you can't hear the high frequencies, it may be
due to the speakers on your computer, but it is always worth thinking about hearing preservation.
As you listen to these sounds, note that the high frequencies seem strangely similar. Think about cochlear-implant patients. These
patients have lost hair-cell function. Their auditory nerve is stimulated by a series of implanted electrodes. The implant can only be
placed in the base of the cochlea, because it is surgically impossible to thread the fine wires more than about 2/3 of a turn. Thus,
cochlear implant patients probably experience something like high frequency sounds.
12.5 The Range of Sounds to Which We Respond; Neural Tuning Curves
Figure 12.8 shows the range of frequencies and intensities of sound to which the human auditory system responds. Our absolute
threshold, the minimum level of sound that we can detect, is strongly dependent on frequency. At the level of pain, sound levels are
about six orders of magnitude above the minimal audible threshold. Sound pressure level (SPL) is measured in decibels (dB).
Decibels are a logarithmic scale, with each 6 dB increase indicating a doubling of intensity. The perceived loudness of a sound is
related to its intensity. Sound frequencies are measured in Hertz (Hz), or cycles per second. Normally, we hear sounds as low as
20 Hz and as high as 20,000 Hz. The frequency of a sound is associated with its pitch. Hearing is best at about 3-4 kHz. Hearing
sensitivity decreases at higher and lower frequencies, but more so at higher than lower frequencies. High-frequency hearing is
typically lost as we age.
Figure 12.8
Audiometric curve for a normal hearing subject and some
neural tuning curves.
The neural code in the central auditory system is complex. Tonotopic organization is maintained throughout the auditory system.
Tonotopic organization means that cells responsive to different frequencies are found in different places at each level of the central
auditory system, and that there is a standard (logarithmic) relationship between this position and frequency. Each cell has a
characteristic frequency (CF). The CF is the frequency to which the cell is maximally responsive. A cell will usually respond to
other frequencies, but only at greater intensities. The neural tuning curve is a plot of the amplitude of sounds at various frequencies
necessary to elicit a response from a central auditory neuron. The tuning curves for several different neurons are superimposed on
the audibility curves in Figure 12.8. The depicted neurons have CFs that vary from low to high frequencies (and are shown with red
to blue colors, respectively). If we recorded from all auditory neurons, we would basically fill the area within the audibility curves.
When sounds are soft they will stimulate only those few neurons with that CF, and thus neural activity will be confined to one set of
fibers or cells at one particular place. As sounds get louder they stimulate other neurons, and the area of activity will increase.
Graduate Students Sarah Baum, Heather Turner, Nadeeka Dias, Deepna Thakkar, Natalie Sirisaengtaksin and Jonathan Flynn of the
Neuroscience Graduate Program at UTHealth Houston further explain the structures, functions and pathways of the auditory system
in an animated video "The Journey of Sound".
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter12.html 5/7

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Auditory System: Structure and Function (Section 2, Chapter 12) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscienc…
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
High frequencies are transduced
A. at the apex of the cochlea
B. at the base of the cochlea
C. throughout the cochlea
D. by vibrations of the stapes
E. at the superior temporal gyrus
Question 2 A B C D E
Transduction of mechanical to neural signals occurs
A. at the base of the outer hair cells
B. at K+ channels in stereocilia
C. between the oval and round windows
D. in the scala vestibuli
E. in the scala tympani
Question 3 A B C D E
Primary auditory cortex is located in
A. parietal lobe
B. lateral surface of occipital lobe
C. superior temporal gyrus
D. parahippocampal gyrus
E. middle frontal gyrus
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter12.html 6/7

1/7/25, 10:05 AM Auditory System: Structure and Function (Section 2, Chapter 12) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscienc…
Question 4 A B C D E
Which of the following participate in audition?
A. trigeminal nerve
B. lateral lemniscus
C. medial lemniscus
D. pontine nuclei
E. oculomotor nerve
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter12.html 7/7



1/7/25, 10:04 AM Vestibular System: Pathways and Reflexes (Section 2, Chapter 11) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscien…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 2: Sensory Systems
Search
Chapter 11: Vestibular System: Pathways and Reflexes
Lincoln Gray, Ph.D., Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, James Madison University
Reviewed and revised 07 Oct 2020
11.1 Overview of Ascending and Descending Pathways
The first-order vestibular afferents have their cell bodies in the vestibular (Scarpa’s) ganglion, which is found at the distal end of
the internal auditory meatus. Their axons travel in the vestibular portion of the VIIIth cranial nerve through the internal auditory
meatus and enter the brain stem at the junction between the pons and the medulla where the IVth ventricle is the widest. Most of
these afferents project to one of the four nearby vestibular nuclei in the rostral medulla and caudal pons. A few of the vestibular
afferents go directly to the cerebellum through the inferior cerebellar peduncle. The cerebellum coordinates the movements that
maintain balance. There are many connections between the cerebellum and the vestibular nuclei.
Figure 11.1
Summary of ascending and descending vestibular
pathways. 1) Press PLAY to view the pathway. 2) Roll
over each word to view the location
Figure 11.1 shows a summary of these ascending and descending vestibular pathways. Upon pressing the "play" button, the four
vestibular nuclei appear in outline. Note that the medial and inferior nuclei are usually seen together in the rostral medulla. The
lateral and superior nuclei are smaller and are seen in the pons. The ascending tracts are shown in blue. These arise from the
superior and medial nuclei and ascend in medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF) to the oculomotor nuclei (III, IV, VI).The
lateral vestibulospinal tract is shown in green. It descends ipsilaterally to the sacral cord. The medial vestibulospinal tract is
shown in red. It descends bilaterally in the MLF to thoracic levels. The cerebellar afferents are not shown in this summary, but these
come from the medial and inferior vestibular nuclei.
The 1st order vestibular afferents arise in Scarpa's ganglion, which is in the distal portion of the internal auditory meatus. The
axons travel in the vestibular portion of the VIIIth cranial nerve and enter the brain stem at the pontomedullary junction.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter11.html 1/5

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Vestibular System: Pathways and Reflexes (Section 2, Chapter 11) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscien…
There are four 2nd order vestibular nuclei: the inferior, medial, lateral (Deiter’s) and superior vestibular nuclei. All four nuclei are
found beneath the floor of the fourth ventricle in the medulla and pons, lateral to the sulcus limitans. The main projections from
these nuclei are to the spinal cord (controlling head and body position), to the three, extraocular motor nuclei (III, IV, VI,
controlling eye movements), to the thalamus (VPI, eventually reaching the cortex and conscious perception of movement and
gravity), and to the cerebellum (coordinating postural adjustments).
The main descending tracts are the lateral vestibulospinal tract from the lateral vestibular nucleus and the medial vestibulospinal
tract from the medial vestibular nucleus. The lateral vestibular tract starts in the lateral vestibular nucleus and descends the length
of the spinal cord on the same side. This pathway helps us walk upright. The medial vestibular tract starts in the medial vestibular
nucleus and extends bilaterally through mid-thoracic levels of the spinal cord in the MLF. This tract affects head movements and
helps integrate head and eye movements. In summary, remember that the lateral vestibulo-spinal tract is ipsilateral and long; the
medial vestibulo-spinal tract is bilateral but shorter.
The main ascending tracts are from the superior and medial vestibular nuclei to the extraocular muscles through the medial
longitudinal fasciculus (MLF).
11.2 Vestibular Connections to the Oculomotor Nuclei
Figure 11.2 shows details of the vestibular fibers ascending in the MLF to the oculomotor nuclei. Second-order afferents arise in the
medial and superior vestibular nuclei. Connections from the MLF to the abducens, trochlear and oculomotor nuclei can be seen.
These connections coordinate eye movements in response to head movements. Details of this coordination for horizontal eye
movements are elaborated in the section on vestibular structure and function (See Figure 10.2).
Figure 11.2
Vestibular connections to the oculomotor nuclei. 1) Press
PLAY to begin the pathway. 2) Click on each layer to see it
enlarge 3) Roll over a layer to identify it's name.
Figure 11.3 shows controversial details of the ascending vestibular pathway that gives rise to the conscious perception. Afferents
from primarily the superior vestibular nucleus ascend to the thalamus (the ventral posterior intermediate nucleus) probably in the
lateral lemniscus or in the reticular formation beside the MLF. The primary cortical receiving areas for the vestibular system are
more diffuse than for other sensory systems, and there is some dispute about their locations. Most people believe there is a cortical
vestibular area in the parietal lobe near where the intraparietal sulcus meets the postcentral gyrus. This would be close to the
somatic area of the head, which makes sense for the sensation of dizziness. Others believe there is an area of vestibular cortex
anterior to primary auditory cortex. (See Figure 13.3) This pathway is bilateral.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter11.html 2/5

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Vestibular System: Pathways and Reflexes (Section 2, Chapter 11) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscien…
Figure 11.3
Possible pathway to vestibular cortex. 1) Press PLAY to begin the pathway.
2) Then, click on each layer to see it enlarge with the path showing OR click
before playing to see the layer without the path showing. 3) Roll over a
layer to identify its name.
11.3 Vestibulo-cerebellar Connections
Figure 11.4 shows details of the vestibulo-cerebellar connections. Some vestibular afferents go directly to the cerebellum
through the inferior cerebellar peduncle. Most 1st order afferents synapse in the medial and inferior vestibular nuclei and then
ascend to the cerebellum in the inferior cerebellar peduncle. Most of these afferents innervate the flocculonodular node. Many
interconnections are found between the vestibular nuclei and the cerebellum, which coordinate the postural adjustments.
Figure 11.4
Some vestibular inputs to the cerebellum. 1) Press PLAY to begin the pathway. 2) Then,
click on the layer to see it enlarge with the path showing OR click before playing to see the
layer without the path showing.
11.4 Lateral and Medial Vestibulospinal Tract
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter11.html 3/5

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Vestibular System: Pathways and Reflexes (Section 2, Chapter 11) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscien…
Figure 11.5 shows details of the lateral vestibulospinal tract. As the name suggests, this tract arises in the lateral vestibular
nucleus. The tract descends through the inferior vestibular nucleus, giving this nucleus its "salt and pepper" appearance. Below the
medulla the lateral vestibulospinal tract descends in the anterior white matter down the entire length of the spinal cord. This tract
modulates postural adjustments to movements. For example, the reason we stagger after spinning is due to excess activity in the
lateral vestibulospinal tract.
Figure 11.5
The lateral vestibulospinal tract. 1) Press PLAY to begin the
pathway. 2) Then, click on each layer to see it enlarge with the path
showing OR click before playing to see the layer without the path
showing. 3) Roll over a layer to identify it's name. Figure 11.6 shows
details of the medial vestibulo
Figure 11.6 shows details of the medial vestibulospinal tract. As its name suggests, this tract starts in the medial vestibular
nucleus. It is a bilateral tract. It descends no lower than the mid-thoracic cord. It mediates head position by controlling the muscles
of the neck and shoulder
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
The vestibular ocular reflex (VOR) depends on all of the following EXCEPT:
A. trochlear nucleus
B. medial longitudinal fasciculus
C. nystagmus
D. superior vestibular nucleus
E. lateral vestibular nucleus
Question 2 A B C D
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter11.html 4/5

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Vestibular System: Pathways and Reflexes (Section 2, Chapter 11) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscien…
Which descending vestibular pathway is ipsilateral and reaches sacral levels of the spinal cord?
A. lateral vestibular pathway
B. medial vestibular pathway
C. medial longitudinal fasciculus
D. trapezoid body
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter11.html 5/5



1/7/25, 10:04 AM Vestibular System: Structure and Function (Section 2, Chapter 10) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscien…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 2: Sensory Systems
Search
Chapter 10: Vestibular System: Structure and Function
Lincoln Gray, Ph.D., Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, James Madison University
Reviewed and revised 07 Oct 2020
10.1 Vestibular System
All living organisms monitor their environment and one important aspect of that environment is gravity and the orientation of the
body with respect to gravity. In addition, animals that locomote must be able to adjust their orientation with respect to self
generated movements, as well as forces that are exerted upon them from the outside world. The vestibular system performs
these essential tasks. It engages a number of reflex pathways that are responsible for making compensatory movements and
adjustments in body position. It also engages pathways that project to the cortex to provide perceptions of gravity and movement.
The first section of the Chapter begins with a description of the components of the peripheral sensory apparatus and describes the
ways in which specialized receptors transduce mechanical signals into electrical events. The second section describes the
projections of the vestibular afferents to the vestibular nuclei, and projection pathways from the vestibular nuclei to other brain
structures such as the cerebellum.
The membranous labyrinth of the inner ear consists of three semicircular ducts (horizontal, anterior and posterior), two otolith
organs (saccule and utricle), and the cochlea (which is discussed in the chapter on Auditory System: Structure and Function).
The Semicircular Ducts
Figure 10.1 shows the main action of the semicircular ducts. These sensory organs respond to angular acceleration. In Figure
10.1, press the "expand" button to see progressively finer views of the horizontal semicircular duct. This expansion proceeds from
the inner ear as it sits in the head, to a sketch of the horizontal semicircular duct, to a detail of the ampulla. (In the outline of the
single horizontal semicircular duct the angle has changed, and what was initially horizontal is now seen as a vertically-oriented duct
on the computer screen.) The ampulla is a localized dilatation at one end of the semicircular duct. A patch of innervated hair cells is
found at the base of the ampulla in a structure termed a crista (meaning crest). The crista contains hair cells with stereocilia
oriented in a consistent direction. The cupula, a thin vane, sits atop this crest, filling the lumen of the semicircular duct. The
stereocilia of the hair cells are embedded in the gelatinous cupula.
By pressing the "play button" in Figure 10.1, the animation will show the effects of head rotation. As the head rotates in one
direction, inertia of the fluid causes it to lag, and hence generate relative motion in the semicircular duct in the direction opposite
that of the head movement. This moving fluid bends the broad vane of the cupula. The stereocilia of the hair cells are bent because
they are embedded in the gelatinous cupula. Shearing of the hair cells opens potassium channels, as discussed at the beginning of
the auditory section (See Figure 12.1).
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter10.html 1/6

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Vestibular System: Structure and Function (Section 2, Chapter 10) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscien…
Figure 10.1
The Semicircular Duct. Press EXPAND to see drawings of the horizontal semicircular
duct. Then, press PLAY to watch the reaction to head movement.
There are three pairs of semicircular ducts, which are oriented roughly 90 degrees to each other for maximum ability to detect
angular rotation of the head. Each slender duct has one ampulla. When the head turns, fluid in one or more semicircular ducts
pushes against the cupula and bends the cilia of the hair cells. Fluid in the corresponding semicircular duct on the opposite side of
the head moves in the opposite direction.
The basic transduction mechanism is the same in the auditory and vestibular systems (See Figure 12.1). A mechanical stimulus
bends the cilia of the hair cells. Fine thread-like tip links connect to trap doors in the adjacent cilium. Bending the hair cells
stretches the tip link, causing an influx of K+ ions and the generation of neural impulses in the VIIIth cranial nerve.
Hair cells in the vestibular system are slightly different from those in the auditory system, in that vestibular hair cells have one
tallest cilium, termed the kinocilium. Bending the stereocilia toward the kinocilium depolarizes the cell and results in increased
afferent activity. Bending the stereocilia away from the kinocilium hyperpolarizes the cell and results in a decrease in afferent
activity.
The semicircular ducts work in pairs to detect head movements (angular acceleration). A turn of the head excites the receptors in
one ampulla and inhibits receptors in the ampulla on the other side.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter10.html 2/6

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Vestibular System: Structure and Function (Section 2, Chapter 10) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscien…
Figure 10.2
The Counteracting Influences of Bilateral Vestibular Stimulation
Press EXPAND to see drawings of the horizontal semicircular duct.
Then press PLAY to watch the reaction to head movement.
Figure 10.2 is an extension of Figure 10.1. Begin by pressing "expand" to show details from the horizontal semicircular ducts on
both sides of the head. Beneath the ampullae are new details, which highlight the orientation of the stereocilia in both cristae and
their outputs. The kinocilia are oriented in the direction of the ampullae (ampullo fugal) within the ducts on both sides. The two
sides are mirror images. There is a constant low level of ionic influx into the body of the hair cells, so there is a steady-state
receptor potential and a spontaneous low-level discharge of afferent activity. These neutral neurophysiological properties are shown
in graphs below each ampulla.
Figure 10.2 is a diagram of the cranial nerves and their nuclei that mediate interactions between the vestibular system and eye
muscles appears as an inset. By pressing the "play" button you will see an animation of this. A constant low level of spontaneous
activity keeps all the muscles slightly and equally contracted, causing the eyes to look straight ahead. When the head turns, inertia
causes the fluid to move more slowly than the head, generating relative fluid motion in the semicircular duct in the opposite
direction of the head turn. This moving fluid, shown by arrows in the lumens of the semicircular duct, bends the hair cells on both
sides of the head. Because the two sides are mirror images, the stereocilia are bent toward their kinocilium on one side and away
from their kinocilium on the other side. Shearing of the stereocilia toward the kinocilium causes a depolarization of the receptor
potential and an increase in afferent action potentials. There is an opposite effect on the other side – a decrease in afferent activity.
These counteracting bilateral changes in afferent activity affect the vestibular and oculomotor nuclei. The ampullo fugal movement
of fluid on the patient's right (reader's left) causes an increase in afferent activity (shown in green for "go" in the inset). This has a
positive effect on the right medial and superior vestibular nuclei, which in turn stimulate the ipsilateral oculomotor and contralateral
abducens nuclei. There are exactly opposite effects on the other side (shown in red for "stop" in the inset). The result of these
combined counteracting effects is a smooth movement of the eyes toward the left, keeping the visual field stable as the head turns.
The Otoliths
Figure 10.3 illustrates the otolithic organs, the saccule and utricle. Press "expand" to see the utricle at the top of Figure 10.3
and the saccule at the bottom. These two similar organs lie against the walls of the inner ear between the semicircular ducts and
the cochlea. The receptors, called maculae (meaning "spot"), are patches of hair cells topped by small, calcium carbonate crystals
called otoconia. The saccule and utricle lie at 90 degrees to each other. Thus, with any position of the head, gravity will bend the
cilia of one patch of hair cells, due to the weight of the otoconia to which they are attached by a gelatinous layer. This bending of
the cilia produces afferent activity going through the VIIIth nerve to the brainstem.
Activate Figure 10.3 to view the actions of the utricle and saccule. The utricle is most sensitive to tilt when the head is upright. The
saccule is most sensitive to tilt when the head is horizontal. Unlike the semicircular ducts, the kinocilia of hair cells in the maculae
are NOT oriented in a consistent direction. The kinocilia point toward (in the utricle) or away from (in the saccule) a middle line
called the striola. The striola is shown as a dashed line in Figure 10.3. Because hair cells are oriented in different directions, tilts in
any direction will activate some afferents.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter10.html 3/6

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Vestibular System: Structure and Function (Section 2, Chapter 10) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscien…
Figure 10.3
Actions of the Static Vestibular System. Press EXPAND to open the animation. Then press PLAY
to watch the reactions to head movement.
10.2 Vestibulo-ocular Reflex, Nystagmus, and Caloric Testing
The vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR) controls eye movements to stabilize images during head movements. As the head moves in
one direction, the eyes reflexively move in the other direction. The VOR is only effective up to a speed of about 50o/sec. The action
of the VOR can be seen by moving your head from side to side. The image you see is stable, despite the head movement. But as
you increase the speed of oscillatory head movements, you can get to a rate of angular velocity where the VOR is no longer
effective, and you will see the visual image start to shift. The VOR would occur in the dark, because the eyes move due to angular
acceleration of the head.
The inset in Figure10.2 that appears when you press the "play" button shows the CNS connections involved in the VOR. This is a
three-neuron circuit. One neuron is in Scarpa's (the vestibular) ganglion; one neuron is in a vestibular nucleus; and one neuron
is in an extraocular motor nucleus.
Figure 10.4
Caloric Testing. Press PLAY to watch
the reactions to caloric testing.
A variant of the VOR, called caloric nystagmus, is used as a test of the vestibular system. If the ear is irrigated with a fluid having
a temperature different than the body (either warmer or cooler), a thermal gradient will be conduced across the small space of the
middle ear.
Figure 10.4 shows a caloric response. Here, cold water is put in the right ear. About 20 ml is injected over about 30 s. The cold
water cools the tympanic membrane, which cools the air in the middle ear, and finally the endolymph. This primarily affects the
horizontal semicircular canal because it is close to the middle ear space.
Cooling somehow hyperpolarizes the hair cells, causing the eyes to drift slowly to the right as if the head was moving to the left.
When the eyes have moved as far to the side as they can go, there is a quick resetting movement in the opposite direction. This
cycle of slow and fast eye-movements is called a nystagmus. Nystagmus is labeled by the direction of the fast component. Figure
10.4 is an illustration of a left-beating nystagmus. Caloric vestibular testing is quantified by the magnitude and direction of the
nystagmus. A useful mnemonic is COWS, meaning "cold-opposite warm-same". That is, irrigation of one ear with cold water
produces a nystagmus away from the irrigated ear, while warm water produces a nystagmus toward the same ear. The normal
response in a caloric vestibular test is symmetric and opposite responses in both ears. Weakness of the caloric response (eyes not
moving when warm or cold water is flushed through one ear), or a spontaneous nystagmus (constantly moving eyes, as if the head
was spinning when it is stable), indicates vestibular lesions.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter10.html 4/6

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Vestibular System: Structure and Function (Section 2, Chapter 10) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscien…
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
Linear acceleration is transduced in the:
A. Cupula
B. Cristae
C. Maculae
D. Organ of Corti
E. Scarpa's ganglion
Question 2 A B C D
Which sensory receptor is most sensitive to angular acceleration?
A. Crista
B. Utricle
C. Saccule
D. Organ of Corti
Question 3 A B C D E
Which of the following is correct regarding vestibular nuclei?
A. There are six
B. They are located beneath the floor of the third ventricle
C. They receive afferent fibers from the spinal ganglion
D. They project only to the cerebellum
E. They are connected to the 3rd, 4th, and 6th cranial nerve nuclei by the medial
longitudinal fasciculus.
Question 4 A B C D E
Meniere's disease is associated with
A. loss of vestibular hair cells
B. damage to the vestibular nuclei
C. damage to cranial nerve VIII
D. damage to Scarpa's ganglion
E. excess endolymph in the membranous labyrinth
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter10.html 5/6

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Vestibular System: Structure and Function (Section 2, Chapter 10) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscien…
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter10.html 6/6



1/7/25, 10:04 AM Chemical Senses: Olfaction and Gustation (Section 2, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscienc…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 2: Sensory Systems
Search
Chapter 9: Chemical Senses: Olfaction and Gustation
Max O. Hutchins, Ph.D., Department of Integrative Biology and Pharmacology, McGovern Medical School
Reviewed and revised 07 Oct 2020
An appreciation of the flavor of foods requires the diverse interaction of several sensory systems. Taste and smell are the principal
systems for distinguishing flavors. However, tactile, thermal, and nociceptive sensory input from the oral mucosa contributes to
food quality. Saliva also is an important factor in maintaining acuity of taste receptor cells (Figure 9.1). Its mechanisms of action
include; acting as a solvent for polar solutes, transporting solutes to the taste receptors, buffering action for acidic foods and
reparative action on the lingual epithelium.
Figure 9.1
Flavor of foods is dependent upon the oral sensory
system, salivary secretion and mastication.
9.1 Gustatory System
Recent technical advances in neurophysiology have made it possible to identify the physiological mechanisms of signal transduction
for the detection and discrimination of various taste stimuli by the taste receptor cells.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter09.html 1/9

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Chemical Senses: Olfaction and Gustation (Section 2, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscienc…
Figure 9.2
Generalized structure of a taste bud and cells.
Morphology of Taste Buds and Cell Types
Taste buds are located on papillae and distributed on the surface of the tongue. Taste buds are also found on the oral mucosa of the
palate and epiglottis. These pear-shaped structures contain about 80 cells arranged around a central taste pore (Figure 9.2).
Taste receptor cells are spindle shaped, modified neuro-epithelial cells that extend from the base to the apex of the taste buds.
Voltage-gated channel proteins for Na+, K+ & Ca2+ are present in the plasma membrane with the K+-gated channel proteins
located in larger numbers on the apical membrane of the taste cells. Synaptic vesicles are present near the apex and the basal
region in many taste cells. Microvilli from each taste cell project into the taste pore which communicate with the dissolved solutes
on the surface of the tongue. These receptor cells are innervated by afferent nerve fibers penetrating the basal lamina. The nerve
fibers branch extensively and receive synaptic input from the taste receptor cells. A group of non-receptor columnar cells and basal
cells are present within taste buds. The basal cells migrate from adjacent lingual epithelium into the buds and differentiate into
taste receptor cells which are replaced about every 9-10 days.
Transport of Solutes
Taste solutes are transported to the taste pore and diffuse through the fluid layer to make contact with membrane receptor proteins
on the microvilli and apical membrane. Taste sensitivity is dependent upon the concentration of the taste molecules as well as their
solubility in saliva. Many bitter tasting hydrophobic solutes interact with an odorant binding protein produced by von Ebner’s glands
in the posterior region of the tongue.
Sensory Transduction
Taste sensation can be evoked by many diverse taste solutes. The pattern of membrane potential change include depolarization,
depolarization followed by hyperpolarization, or only hyperpolarization. Action potentials in the taste receptor cells lead to an
increase Ca2+ influx through voltage-gated membrane channels with the release of Ca2+ from intracellular stores. In response to
this cation, neurotransmitter is released, which produces synaptic potentials in the dendrites of the sensory nerves and action
potentials in afferent nerve fibers (Figure 9.3).
Salts
The taste of salts is mediated by Na+ ions which do not interact with a membrane receptor but diffuse through a Na+ channel
located in the microvilli and apical membrane. Anions such as Cl- contribute to the salty taste, but anions are transported into these
cells by a paracellular route. The influx of these ions of salt evokes a depolarization in the apical membrane (Figure 9.3).
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter09.html 2/9

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Chemical Senses: Olfaction and Gustation (Section 2, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscienc…
Figure 9.3
A taste receptor cell responding to Na+ salt.
Acids and Sour Tastes
The hydrogen proton of acids and sour foods can influx through the Na+ channels, or through a proton transport membrane protein
(Figure 9.4). Some acids block the efflux of K+ at the microvilli. The resulting influx of protons or a reduction in K+ conductance will
initiate receptor potentials in response to the quality of sour tastes.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter09.html 3/9

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Chemical Senses: Olfaction and Gustation (Section 2, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscienc…
Figure 9.4
A taste receptor cell responding to acid and sour solutes.
Sweet
Sweet tasting solutes, sugars and related substances, bind to membrane receptor proteins which are coupled to a G-s protein
(gustducin), which activates adenylyl cyclase (AC). Cyclic AMP (cAMP) dependent protein kinase (PKA) reduces K+ efflux in the
apical membrane and produces membrane depolarization (Figure 9.5). Some sweet solutes and non-sugar sweeteners interact with
a receptor membrane protein through a G protein, which activates phospholipase C. A second messenger, inositol triphosphate
(IP ), is synthesized which releases Ca2+ from intracellular stores. Accumulation of Ca2+ depolarizes the cell, releasing
3
neurotransmitter at the synapse.
Figure 9.5
A taste receptor cell responding to sweet solutes.
Bitter
Bitter tasting solutes include many non-toxic and toxic alkaloids, hydrophilic quinine and some divalent ions. The transduction of
bitter tastes involves several mechanisms: 1) blockage of the efflux of K+ by a number of hydrophilic bitter substances generates a
depolarizing potential; 2) interaction with a receptor membrane receptor coupled to the G protein, gustducin, and activation of
cAMP dependent protein kinase with blockage of K+ channels; and 3) involves a receptor protein linked to G-protein and activation
of phospholipase C, which results in substrate hydrolysis to IP , releasing Ca2+ from intracellular stores.
3
These mechanisms for taste transduction were identified in laboratory animals and are probably present in the microvilli and apical
membrane of taste receptor cells in humans. A fifth taste quality, umami, is predicted to interact with a ligand-gated inotropic
glutamate receptor coupled to gustducin and to Ca2+ channel membrane proteins.
Taste stimuli produce depolarizing and hyperpolarizing potentials in individual taste cells. Excitation of voltage-gated Na+, K+, and
Ca2+ channels can generate action potentials which are propagated toward the basal region of the taste cell. These currents open
the voltage-gated Ca2+ channels near the base of the taste cells, which leads to the subsequent release of neurotransmitter. These
transmitters diffuse across the synaptic cleft and lead to the initiation of action potentials in the afferent nerve fibers.
Propagation of a Neural Code to the Gustatory Center
Historically, regional differences for each taste quality were predicted to exist on the tongue’s surface (e.g., sweet on the tip,
sourness and salts on the sides, bitter in the posterior region). However, taste studies conducted on the neural response of whole
cranial nerves demonstrate that a pattern of activity is produced by foods that are similar in taste. These patterns of activity are a
clue to a taste code that occurs in many different taste cells and neurons responding to a particular taste stimulus. This finding
indicates that no single fiber conducts only one taste quality (i.e., sweet, sour), although it may respond best to one quality and
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter09.html 4/9

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Chemical Senses: Olfaction and Gustation (Section 2, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscienc…
least to another. Recognition that branches of nerve fibers innervate several cells within and between taste buds indicates that a
population of sensory nerve fibers activated by a taste stimulus transmits a neural code of the taste quality.
Branches of the facial cranial nerve, the chorda tympani, innervate taste buds in the anterior 2/3 of the tongue and part of the soft
palate. The glossopharyngeal innervate the posterior 1/3 of the tongue. Both the vagus and glossopharyngeal nerves innervate the
pharynx and epiglottis. Axons of these three cranial nerves terminate on 2nd order sensory neurons in the nucleus of the solitary
tract. From this site in the rostral medulla, axons project into the parabrachial nucleus in lower animals but not in humans. In
humans, fibers of the 2nd order neurons travel through the ipsilateral central tegmental tract to the 3rd order sensory neurons in
the ventroposterior medial nucleus (VPM) of the thalamus. The VPM projects to the ipsilateral gustatory cortex located near the
post-central gyrus representing the tongue or to the insular cortex. See Figures 9.6 and 9.7.
Figure 9.6
Neural pathway for taste into the gustatory cortex.
Figure 9.7
Intensity of lights as an example of summed neural activity in each cranial
nerve in response to a specific taste quality.
9.2 Olfactory System
The olfactory system in humans is an extremely discriminative and sensitive chemosensory system. Humans can distinguish
between 1,000 to a predicted high of 4,000 odors. All of these odors can be classified into six major groups; floral, fruit, spicy,
resin, burnt, and putrid (Refer back to Figure 9.1). The perception of odors begins with the inhalation and transport of volatile
aromas to the olfactory mucosa that are located bilaterally in the dorsal posterior region of the nasal cavity.
Morphology of Olfactory Mucosa and Cell Types
The olfactory mucosa consists of a layer of columnar epithelium, surrounding millions of olfactory neurons, which are the only
neurons to communicate with the external environment and undergo constant replacement. Basal cells near the lamina propria
undergo differentiation and develop into these neurons about every 5-8 weeks. The glial-like columnar cells surround and support
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter09.html 5/9

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Chemical Senses: Olfaction and Gustation (Section 2, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscienc…
the bipolar neurons. These columnar cells have microvilli at their apex and secrete mucus which is layered on the surface of the
olfactory mucosa (Figure 9.8).
Figure 9.8
The generalized structure of the olfactory mucosa and axons of
olfactory neurons passing through the cribriform plate.
The bipolar olfactory neurons have a single dendrite which projects towards the apical mucosa. The terminal ending of the dendrites
are flattened and have 5-25 cilia that are embedded in the mucosa on the surface. Each cilia may have as many as 40 specific
receptor membrane proteins for interaction with different odorant molecules. The density of these receptors is enormous for
humans, but significantly greater in many lower animals.
Dissolution of Odorant Molecules and Interaction with Sensory Receptors
Unbound hydrophilic odor molecules diffuse across the layer of mucus, whereas hydrophobic odors must become bound to a specific
odorant binding protein to be transported to each cilium for interaction with specific receptors. All of these receptors have the same
general structure, seven hydrophobic transmembrane regions, but the amino acid sequence within the cylinders spanning the
membrane are extremely diverse which permits the discrimination of a large number of odors.
Transduction of Olfactory Stimuli
Odorant molecules bind reversibly to the diverse receptor membrane proteins which are coupled to a G-s group of proteins called
G . Activation of adenylyl cyclase leads to the formation of cAMP with the activation of Ca2+/ Na+ cation channels. The primary
olf
effect of influx of these ions is depolarization and the generation of a generator potential (Figure 9.9). Generated ionic currents are
graded in response to the flow rate of the odorant molecules and to their concentration. Sites of summated generator potentials
occur across the olfactory mucosa to produce specific spatial pattern of activity for each stimulating odorant molecules, which may
contribute to neural coding of odors. These spatial responses across the olfactory mucosa can be recorded (electro-olfactograms)
with surface electrodes.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter09.html 6/9

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Chemical Senses: Olfaction and Gustation (Section 2, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscienc…
Figure 9.9
Transduction of odorant molecules in an olfactory neuron to action potentials.
Propagation of Action Potentials and Convergence upon the Olfactory Bulb
The resulting influx of Na+ and Ca2+ produces a depolarizing generator potential that spreads to the axon hillock. There, action
potentials are generated, which are propagated to the synaptic endings in the olfactory bulb (Figure 9.9).
Figure 9.10
Convergence of olfactory neuronal axons to synapse with
mitral cells upon the glomeruli of the olfactory bulb.
The action potential frequency is proportional to the concentration of specific odorant molecules. However, action potential
frequency will be attenuated by adaptation or desensitization of the receptor and reduction in the production of cAMP.
Rapid adaptation and removal of the odorants permit continued recognition and discrimination of new aromas that are inhaled in
the next respiratory cycle. Action potentials generated in the axon terminals of activated neurons are propagated into the glomeruli
within the olfactory bulb. The olfactory bulbs have many different types of neurons and these have a laminar distribution. On the
ventral side of the olfactory bulbs is a layer of glomeruli. This is a site at which axon terminals of several thousand olfactory
neurons synapse with numerous dendrites from large mitral cells and tufted cells. Interneurons such as the inhibitory
periglomerular cells synapse with the nerve endings within adjacent glomeruli.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter09.html 7/9

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Chemical Senses: Olfaction and Gustation (Section 2, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscienc…
Millions of axon fibers converge upon only a few thousand glomeruli within each bulb to synapse with about 75,000 mitral cells (see
Figure 9.10) and about twice this number of tufted/periglomerular cells. Mitral cells are 2nd order sensory neurons whose axons
enter the olfactory tract and ascend to the olfactory cortex. This convergence/divergence between the axons of olfactory neurons
and the specialized cells of the olfactory bulb generate excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) in the dendrites of mitral cells and
subsequent action potentials. Lateral inhibition by the periglomerular cells modulates activity in adjacent glomeruli innervated by
other mitral and tuft cells. A complex pattern of neuronal integration for discrimination of various odorant molecules is indicated by
the mechanisms of convergence/divergence with excitation/inhibition of these 2nd order sensory neurons. This complexity is related
to the recognition that no single odor stimulates a specific group of olfactory neurons. Rather a neural code is created from the
activation of multiple receptors and neurons.
9.3 Neural Pathway into the Olfactory Cortex
Figure 9.11
Projection of olfactory bulb into the olfactory cortex.
Axons from mitral and tuft cells project caudally into the olfactory tract. Fibers diverge and synapse with neurons of the anterior
olfactory nucleus (AON). Axons from the AON cross to the opposite side of the hemisphere through the anterior commissure. The
majority of the axons from the olfactory bulb diverge laterally and form the lateral olfactory tract which synapse with nuclei of the
olfactory cortex. These are the piriform cortex (pc), the periamygdaloid cortex, part of the amygdala, and hippocampus. There are
no direct relays from the olfactory bulb into the thalamus, but a few fibers synapse with 3rd order sensory neurons in the
thalamic dorsomedial nucleus which are projected to the ipsilateral cerebral hemisphere (Figure 9.11).
9.4 Conclusion
In conclusion, many olfactory receptors respond to more than one odorant quality just like the taste receptor cells. Coding of the
primary odor depends on the intensity of the odor and on a population response within the olfactory neurons. During neural
processing in the olfactory bulb, a particular discharge occurs to one odorant and a different pattern for another odorant. This
sensory input must be processed before being relayed to the olfactory cortex for perception and recognition of the individual odor.
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
Second-order sensory neurons for taste are located in the
A. Insula
B. Amygdala
C. Nucleus solitarius
D. Uncus
E. Trigeminal ganglion
Question 2 A B C D
All of the following statements are correct about the olfactory receptor neurons EXCEPT:
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter09.html 8/9

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Chemical Senses: Olfaction and Gustation (Section 2, Chapter 9) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neuroscienc…
A. These specialized neurons are replaced about every 5- 8 weeks.
B. Each neuron contains receptors which are specific for a single odorant molecule.
C. The axon of each olfactory neuron synapses in only one glomerulus in the olfactory
bulb.
D. Odorant molecules interact with receptors coupled to a G protein called Golf.
Question 3 A B C D
Which of the following cells are 2nd order neurons with axons projecting into the anterior olfactory
cortex?
A. Mitral cells
B. Glomerular cells
C. Periglomerular cells
D. Granule cells
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter09.html 9/9



1/7/25, 10:04 AM Pain Modulation and Mechanisms (Section 2, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Dep…
Home Table of Contents Further Reading Section 2: Sensory Systems
Search
Chapter 8: Pain Modulation and Mechanisms
Nachum Dafny, Ph.D., Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, McGovern Medical School
Reviewed and revised 07 Oct 2020
8.1 Pain Modulation
Most, if not all, ailments of the body cause pain. Pain is interpreted and perceived in the brain. Pain is modulated by two primary
types of drugs that work on the brain: analgesics and anesthetics. The term analgesic refers to a drug that relieves pain without
loss of consciousness. The term central anesthesia refers to a drug that depresses the CNS. It is characterized by the absence of all
perception of sensory modalities, including loss of consciousness without loss of vital functions.
Opiate Analgesia (OA)
The most effective clinically used drugs for producing temporary analgesia and relief from pain are the opioid family, which includes
morphine, and heroin. There are currently no other effective pain therapeutic alternatives to opiates. Several side effects resulting
from opiate use include tolerance and drug dependence (addiction). In general, these drugs modulate the incoming pain
information in the spinal and central sites, as well as relieve pain temporarily, and are also known as opiate producing analgesia
(OA). Opiate antagonist is a drug that antagonizes the opioid effects, such as naloxone or naltrexone, etc. They are competitive
antagonists of opiate receptors. The brain has a neuronal circuit and endogenous substances to modulate pain.
Endogenous Opioids
Opioidergic neurotransmission is found throughout the brain and spinal cord and appears to influence many CNS functions,
including nociception, cardiovascular functions, thermoregulation, respiration, neuroendocrine functions, neuroimmune functions,
food intake, sexual activity, aggressive locomotor behavior as well as learning and memory. Opioids exert marked effects on mood
and motivation and produce euphoria.
Three classes of opioid receptors have been identified: μ-mu, δ-delta and κ-kappa. All three classes are widely distributed in the
brain. The genes encoding each one of them have been cloned and found to be members of the G protein receptors. Moreover,
three major classes of endogenous opioid peptides that interact with the above opiate receptors have been recognized in the CNS:
β-endorphins, enkephalins and the dynorphins. These three opioid peptides are derived from a large protein precursor by three
different genes: the proopiomelanocortin (POMC) gene, the proenkephalin gene and the prodynorphin gene. The opioid peptides
modulate nociceptive input in two ways: 1) block neurotransmitter release by inhibiting Ca2+ influx into the presynaptic terminal, or
2) open potassium channels, which hyperpolarizes neurons and inhibits spike activity. They act on various receptors in the brain
and spinal cord. Enkephalins are considered the putative ligands for the δ receptors, β endorphins for the μ-receptors, and
dynorphins for the κ receptors. The various types of opioid receptors are distributed differently within the central and peripheral
nervous system. There is evidence for functional differences in these receptors in various structures. This explains why many
unwanted side effects occur following opiate treatments. For example, mu (μ) receptors are widespread in the brain stem
parabrachial nuclei, a respiratory center and inhibition of these neurons elicits respiratory depression.
Central or peripheral terminals of nociceptive afferent fibers contain opiate receptors where exogenous and endogenous opioids
could act to modulate the ability to transmit nociceptive information. Moreover, high densities of opiate receptors are found in
periaqueductal gray (PAG), nucleus raphe magnus (NRM), and dorsal raphe (DR) in the rostral ventral medulla, in the spinal cord,
caudate nucleus (CN), septal nucleus, hypothalamus, habenula and hippocampus. Additional details on opiate receptors is provided
later in this lecture.
Systemically administered opioids at analgesic doses activate spinal and supraspinal mechanisms via μ, δ, and κ type opioid
receptors and modulate pain signals.
8.2 Neuronal Circuits that Modulate Pain
For many years it was suggested that somewhere in the CNS there is a circuit that can modulate incoming pain information. The
gate control theory and the ascending/descending pain transmission system are two suggestions of such a circuit.
Gate Control theory
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter08.html 1/7

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Pain Modulation and Mechanisms (Section 2, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Dep…
The first pain modulatory mechanism called the "Gate Control" theory was proposed by Melzack and Wall in the mid 1960s. The
concept of the gate control theory is that non-painful input closes the gates to painful input, which results in prevention of the pain
sensation from traveling to the CNS (i.e., non-noxious input [stimulation] suppresses pain).
Figure 8.1
The gate control theory of pain modulation. The gate control theory is based on
presynaptic inhibition of pain information produced by mechanical stimulation, and
provides the basic rationale for the TENS.
The theory suggests that collaterals of the large sensory fibers carrying cutaneous sensory input activate inhibitory interneurons,
which inhibit (modulate) pain transmission information carried by the pain fibers. Non-noxious input suppresses pain, or sensory
input “closes the gate” to noxious input (Figure 8.1). The gate theory predicts that at the spinal cord level, non-noxious stimulation
will produce presynaptic inhibition on dorsal root nociceptor fibers that synapse on nociceptors spinal neurons (T), and this
presynaptic inhibition will block incoming noxious information from reaching the CNS (i.e., will close the gate to incoming noxious
information).
The gate theory was the rationale for the idea behind the production and the use of transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation
(TENS) for pain relief. To be effective, the TENS unit produces two different current frequencies below the pain threshold that can
be tolerated by the patient. This procedure has partial success in pain therapy.
Stimulation produced analgesia (SPA)
Evidence for an intrinsic analgesia system was demonstrated by intracranial electrical stimulation of certain discrete brain sites.
These areas are the periaqueductal gray (PAG) and nucleus raphe magnus (NRM), dorsal raphe (DR), caudate nucleus (CN), septal
nucleus (Spt) and other nuclei. Such stimulation inhibits pain, (i.e., producing analgesia without behavioral suppression), while the
touch, pressure and temperature sensation remain intact. SPA is more pronounced and lasts a longer time after stimulation in
humans than in experimental animals. Moreover, during SPA, the subjects still respond to nonpainful stimuli such as touch and
temperature within the circumscribed area of analgesia. The most effective CNS sites for SPA are the PAG and the raphe nuclei
(RN).
Figure 8.2
Periaqueductal gray and raphe nucleus stimulation produces
analgesia.
Electrical stimulation of PAG or NRM inhibits spinal thalamic cells, (i.e. spinal neurons that project monosynaptically to the
thalamus) in laminae I, II and V so that the noxious information from the nociceptors are modulated at the spinal cord level. PAG
has neuronal connections to NRM.
The action of the PAG most likely occurs by activation of the descending pathway from NRM and probably also by activation of
ascending connections acting on higher subcortical levels of the CNS. Moreover, electrical stimulation of PAG or NRM produces
behavioral analgesia, (i.e., stimulation produced analgesia, see Figure 8.2). Stimulation produced analgesia (SPA) elicits release of
endorphin and is blocked by the opiate antagonist naloxone.
During PAG and/or RN stimulation, serotonin (5-HT) is also released from ascending and descending axons in subcortical nuclei, in
spinal trigeminal nuclei and in the spinal cord. This release of 5-HT modulates pain transmission by inhibiting incoming sensory
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter08.html 2/7

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Pain Modulation and Mechanisms (Section 2, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Dep…
activity. Depletion of 5-HT by electrical lesion of the raphe nuclei or by a neurotoxic lesion produced by local injection of a chemical
agent like parachlorophenylalanine (PCPA) results in blocking the ability of both opiate (intracranial and systemic) and electrical
stimulation to produce analgesia.
Stimulation Produced Analgesia (SPA) (continued)
To verify whether the electrical stimulation produced analgesia via the release of opiate and serotonin, the area was locally
microinjected with morphine or 5-HT. These microinjections indeed produce analgesia (Figure 8.3). These procedures also provide a
method of identifying brain regions associated with pain suppression and help to produce a map of pain centers. The most effective
method of producing opiate analgesia (OA) is by intracerebral injection of morphine into the PAG.
The PAG and RN and other brain structures where analgesia is produced are also rich in opiate receptors. Intracerebral opioid
administration produced analgesia and SPA can be blocked by either systemic or by local microinjections of naloxone, the morphine
antagonist, into the PAG or RN. Therefore, it has been suggested that the two (OA and SPA) operate by a common mechanism.
If OA and SPA act through the same intrinsic system, then the hypothesis that opiates activate a pain-suppression mechanism is
more likely. In fact, present evidence indicates that microinjections of an opiate into the PAG activate an efferent brainstem system
that suppresses pain transmission at segmental (spinal cord) levels (See Figure 8.3). These observations indicate that analgesia
elicited from the PAG requires a descending pathway to the spinal cord.
8.3 Pain Mechanisms
Ascending and Descending Pain Suppression Mechanism
The primary ascending pain fibers (the A δ and C fibers) reach the dorsal horn of the spinal cord from peripheral sites to innervate
the nociceptor neurons in Rexed laminae I & II. Cells from Rexed lamina II make synaptic connections in Rexed layers IV to VII.
Cells, especially in laminae I and VII of the dorsal horn, give rise to ascending spinothalamic tracts. At the spinal level, opiate
receptors are located at the presynaptic ends of the nocineurons and at the interneural level layers IV to VII in the dorsal horn.
Activation of opiate receptors at the interneuronal level produces hyperpolarization of the neurons, which result in the inhibition of
firing and the release of substance P, a neurotransmitter involved in pain transmission, thereby blocking pain transmission. The
circuit that consists of the periaqueductal gray (PAG) matter in the upper brain stem, the locus coeruleus (LC), the nucleus raphe
magnus (NRM) and the nucleus reticularis gigantocellularis (Rgc) contributes to the descending pain suppression pathway, which
inhibits incoming pain information at the spinal cord level.
As mentioned previously, opioids interact with the opiate receptors at different CNS levels. These opiate receptors are the normal
target sites for neurotransmitters and endogenous opiates such as the endorphins and enkephalins. As a result of binding at the
receptor in subcortical sites, secondary changes which lead to a change in the electrophysiological properties of these neurons and
modulation of the ascending pain information.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter08.html 3/7

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Pain Modulation and Mechanisms (Section 2, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Dep…
Figure 8.3A
Periaqueductal gray and raphe nucleus electrical stimulation produces analgesia.
Figure 8.3B
Microiontophoretical administration of morphine in the periaqueductal gray and 5-HT in the
Raphe nucleus produces analgesia.
What activates the PAG to exert its effects? It was found that noxious stimulation excites neurons in the nucleus reticularis
gigantocellularis (RGC). The nucleus Rgc innervates both the PAG and NRM. The PAG sends axons to NRM, and neurons in NRM
send their axons to the spinal cord. Moreover, bilateral dorsolateral funiculus (DLF) lesions (DLFX) block the analgesia produced by
both electrical stimulation and by microinjection of opiates directly into the PAG and NRM, but they only attenuate the systemic
analgesic effects of opiates (Figure 8.4). These observations support the hypothesis that discrete descending pathways in the DLF
are necessary for both OA and SPA.
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter08.html 4/7

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Pain Modulation and Mechanisms (Section 2, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Dep…
Figure 8.4
Dissection of the DLF (X) blocks the analgesic effects produced by both electrical stimulation
and by microinjection of opioid and 5-HT directly into the PAG and NRM respectively.
The DLF is comprised of fibers originating from several brainstem nuclei, which are serotonergic (5-HT) from neurons located within
the nucleus raphe magnus (NRM); dopaminergic neurons originating from ventral tegmental area (VTA) and adrenergic neurons
originating from the locus coeruleus (LC). These descending fibers suppress noxious input at the nociceptive spinal cord neurons in
laminae I, II, and V.
Opiate receptors have also been found in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, mainly in Rexed laminae I, II, and V, and these spinal
opiate receptors mediate inhibitory effects on dorsal horn neurons transmitting nociceptive information. The action of morphine
appears to be exerted both in the spinal cord and brainstem nuclei (i.e., PAG and NRM). Systemic morphine acts on both brain stem
and spinal cord opiate receptors to produce analgesia. Morphine binds the brainstem opiate receptors, which activates the
brainstem descending serotonergic pathway to spinal cord (i.e., the DLF), and they have an opioid-mediated synapse at the level of
the spinal cord.
This observation suggests that noxious stimuli (rather than non-noxious stimulus - see Gate Theory) are critical for activation of the
descending pain modulation circuit (i.e., pain suppresses pain via the descending DLF pathway).
In addition, there are ascending connections from the PAG and raphe nuclei to PF-CM complex. These thalamic areas are part of the
ascending pain modulation at the diencephalon level.
Stress-Induced Analgesia (SIA)
Analgesia may be produced in certain stressful situations. Exposure to a variety of painful or stressful events produces an analgesic
reaction. This phenomenon is called stress induced analgesia (SIA). SIA has been thought to provide insight into the
psychological and physiological factors that activate endogenous pain control and opiate systems. For example, soldiers wounded in
battle or athletes injured in sports events sometimes report that they do not feel pain during the battle or game; however, they will
experience the pain later after the battle or game has ended. It has been demonstrated (in animals) that electrical shocks cause
stress-induced analgesia. Based on these experiments, it is assumed that the stress the soldiers and the athletes experienced
suppressed the pain which they would later experience.
It has been suggested that endogenous opiates are released in response to stress and inhibit pain by activating the midbrain
descending system. Moreover, some SIA exhibited cross tolerance with opiate analgesia, which indicates that this SIA is mediated
via opiate receptors. Experiments using different parameters of electrical shock stimulation demonstrate that such stress produces
analgesia and some of these stresses that produce analgesia could be blocked by the opioid antagonist naloxone, whereas others
were not blocked by naloxone. These observations lead to the conclusion that both opiate and non-opiate forms of SIA exist.
8.4 Summary
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter08.html 5/7

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Pain Modulation and Mechanisms (Section 2, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Dep…
The modulation of pain by electrical brain stimulation results from the activation of descending inhibitory fibers, which modulate
(block) the input and output of laminae I, II, V and VII neurons. The route from the PAG to the spinal cord is not direct. It appears
to involve a link with the 5-HT-rich raphe nuclei, as well as norepinephrine (NE) from the locus coeruleus (LC) and dopamine (DA)
from the ventral tegmental area (VTA). Axons from the raphe nuclei, locus coeruleus and VTA project to the spinal cord dorsal horn
by way of the DLF to terminate in lamina I, II and IV to VII (i.e., stimulation of NRM, VTA and LC inhibits the neuronal activity of
lamina I, II and IV to VII neurons).
Opioid and serotonergic antagonists reverse both local opiate analgesia and brain-stimulation produced analgesia. This suggests
that OA and SPA are produced via the same descending inhibitory system.
In conclusion, in the CNS, much of the information from the nociceptive afferent fibers results from excitatory discharges of
multireceptive neurons. The pain information in the CNS is controlled by ascending and descending inhibitory systems, using
endogenous opioids, or other endogenous substances like serotonin as inhibitory mediators. In addition, a powerful inhibition of
pain-related information occurs in the spinal cord. These inhibitory systems can be activated by brain stimulation, intracerebral
microinjection of morphine, and peripheral nerve stimulation. Centrally acting analgesic drugs activate these inhibitory control
systems. However, pain is a complex perception that is influenced also by prior experience and by the context within which the
noxious stimulus occurs. This sensation is also influenced by emotional state. Therefore, the response to pain varies from subject to
subject.
Test Your Knowledge
Question 1 A B C D E
According to the descending pain suppression theory,
A. Descending spinothalamic fibers produce presynaptic inhibition of Rexed lamina VII
neurons.
B. Pain stimuli activate descending fibers in the dorsolateral fasciculus.
C. Mechanical stimulation produces descending postsynaptic inhibition of Rexed lamina
VIII neurons.
D. Transection of the dorsal column blocks the descending fibers producing analgesia.
E. Descending corticospinal fibers produce postsynaptic inhibition of nociceptive spinal
neurons will not affect pain sensation.
Question 2 A B C D E
The Melzack-Wall gate theory refers to:
A. Ascending pain suppression system.
B. Non-noxious input suppresses pain at the spinal cord.
C. Electrical simulation-produced analgesia.
D. Cortical control system suppresses pain.
E. Descending pain suppression system.
Question 3 A B C D E
Electrical stimulation in the periaqueductal gray elicits:
A. Circular movement
B. Analgesia
C. Catatonia
D. Tremors
E. Hyperactivity
Question 4 A B C D E
The following nuclei are involved in the serotonergic descending modulation system of pain:
A. Locus coeruleus
B. Central gray
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter08.html 6/7

1/7/25, 10:04 AM Pain Modulation and Mechanisms (Section 2, Chapter 8) Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences | Dep…
C. Ventral trigeminal area
D. Raphe nuclei
E. Ventro-posterior medial thalamus
Donations to Neuroscience Online will help fund development of new features and content.
Contents © 1997-Present - McGovern Medical School at UTHealth
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy - Site webmaster: nba.webmaster@uth.tmc.edu
Instructional design and illustrations created through the Academic Technology
https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/s2/chapter08.html 7/7



